##### CORE DOCUMENT

# PRINCIPLES & REQUIREMENTS

PUBLICATION DATE **31.01.**

VERSION **v. 2. 1 – Effective 5.12.2024** (date unchanged from V2.0)
NEXT PLANNED UPDATE **5.12.**

CONTACT DETAILS
The Gold Standard Foundation
International Environment House 2
Chemin de Balexert 7- 9
1219 Châtelaine Geneva, Switzerland
Tel +41 22 788 70 80
Email help@goldstandard.org

## SUMMARY

This document provides the mandatory Principles & Requirements that all Gold Standard
projects must conform to.


## TABLE OF CONTENTS

   - 1| EFFECTIVE DATE, SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY
      - 1.1 | EFFECTIVE DATE
      - 1.2 | SCOPE
      - 1.3 | APPLICABILITY...............................................................................................
   - 2| CERTIFICATION TYPES
      - 2.1 | GOLD STANDARD CERTIFIED PROJECT DESIGN
      - 2.2 | GOLD STANDARD CERTIFIED PROJECT
      - 2.3 | STACKING
   - 3| GENERAL ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
   - 4| ELIGIBILITY PRINCIPLES AND REQUIREMENTS
      - Principle 1: Contribution to Climate Security & Sustainable Development
      - Principle 2: Safeguarding Principles
      - Principle 3: Stakeholder Inclusivity
      - Principle 4 : Demonstration of Real Outcomes
      - Principle 5 : Financial Additionality & Ongoing Financial Need
   - 5| PROJECT CYCLE
   - 6| PROJECT DOCUMENTATION AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENT
   - 7| NON-CONFORMITY
- ANNEX A - DESIGN CHANGE APPROVAL PROCEDURE
- ANNEX B – CONFLICT AND EMERGENCY ZONES
   - 1| Scope and Applicability
   - 2| Approval Procedures


### 1| EFFECTIVE DATE, SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY

#### 1.1 | EFFECTIVE DATE

1.1.1 | Gold Standard for the Global Goals is effective for all projects seeking Gold
Standard Certification as of 05th December 2024. For projects applying
previous versions of Gold Standard please refer to the Transition
Requirements.

#### 1.2 | SCOPE

1.2.1 | The Principles & Requirements set out in this document are applicable to all
Project Developers and the Projects or Programmes* for which Gold Standard
Certification is sought. It also represents the Requirements against which
Gold Standard Validation and Verification Bodies (hereafter VVBs) shall
Validate or Verify the Project, in conjunction with the Validation & Verification
Body Requirements and any applicable Conformity Criteria.

```
*Note that for brevity, the standard refers to Projects throughout the text;
this may be read as Projects, Programmes or interventions unless explicitly
stated.
```
1.2.2 | The Requirements shall be applied as per the relevant sections contained
within this document and those associated or referenced.

1.2.3 | From time-to-time Gold Standard may issue updates, changes, clarifications
or corrections to the Requirements. These shall be published to the Gold
Standard WebsiteGold Standard provides notice of all such changes and
specific dates for implementation and applicability. It is the responsibility of
the Project Developer to remain up to date and to apply all such updates as
required for its Project by checking the rule updates section in the Gold
Standard Website, regardless of whether a notification of change has been
received.

1.2.4 | Stakeholders may submit suggested updates, edits, changes or additions to
Gold Standard for the Global Goals by sending an email to
help@goldstandard.org. Such requests shall be considered as per the
Standards Setting Procedure. Gold Standard reserves the right to accept or
reject such submissions at its own discretion.

1.2.5 | In some circumstances Gold Standard allows modules or elements from other,
partner or endorsed Standards (for example Fairtrade, FSC, CDM) to be
considered as evidence that may be used to demonstrate conformity to
certain Gold Standard Requirements. In such cases the Gold Standard
Requirements still apply but, to help streamline processes and for practicality,
shared evidence may be provided.

1.2.6 | The Gold Standard rules are interpreted in accordance with the Standard’s
core principles of fairness, reliability, conservativeness and pragmatism.


#### 1.3 | APPLICABILITY...............................................................................................

1.3.1 | All Projects shall apply the Principles & Requirements and any associated
documents.

1.3.2 | All Projects shall also apply the Activity Requirements related to the project
type – unless stated otherwise. If no Activity Requirements exist for the
proposed project type, then the Requirements shall be as per this document.

1.3.3 | In addition to 1.3.1 and 1.3.2, Projects that seek issuance of Gold Standard
Certified Impact Statements or Products shall also follow the applicable Gold
Standard Approved Impact quantification methodologies and related Product
Requirements.

### 2| CERTIFICATION TYPES

```
This section provides an overview of the types of Gold Standard Certification
outcomes. It should be read in conjunction with the Claims Guidelines which
provides further guidance as to the application and communication around Gold
Standard Project and Impact Certification.
```
#### 2.1 | GOLD STANDARD CERTIFIED PROJECT DESIGN

2.1.1 | Gold Standard Certified Project Design status is achieved by successfully
undergoing Validation and Design Review (Design Certification), which
means:

```
(a) The project design and planning has met Gold Standard for Global
Goals Requirements, including Safeguarding Principles, Stakeholder
Consultation and Engagement, and Sustainable Development Goals
(SDG) requirements and has developed a compliant Monitoring Plan.
(b) The project design, monitoring plan and ex-ante impact assessment
have been validated by an accredited, approved third party VVB.
(c) Following this, the project has been reviewed by Gold Standard and is
subject to an over-arching independent review by the Gold Standard
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) and NGO Supporters.
(d) It does not mean or imply that any impacts have been realised or will
be realised or have been verified by a VVB or certified by Gold
Standard.
(e) To certify that impacts have been realised, a project shall undergo
Performance Certification.
```

#### 2.2 | GOLD STANDARD CERTIFIED PROJECT

2.2.1 | Gold Standard Certified Project status is achieved by successfully undergoing
Verification and performance review (Performance Certification), which
means:

```
(a) The project has followed a Monitoring Plan approved at the time of
Design Certification and has submitted Monitoring Report for
Verification.
(b) The project and its Certified SDG Impacts have been validated and
verified as required by an accredited, approved third party VVB.
(c) Following this, the project has been reviewed by Gold Standard and is
subject to an over-arching independent review by the Gold Standard
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) and NGO Supporters.
(d) Any Certified SDG Impacts stated to have been achieved are real.
(e) A project may be issued Certified Impact Statements and Products such
as Gold Standard Verified Emission Reductions (VERs). This is subject
to successful Performance Certification of the Project’s conformity to
applicable Gold Standard Impact Quantification Methodology and
Product Requirements.
(f) The Project is also able to promote its claims in accordance with the
Claims Guidelines.
```
2.2.2 | All projects from Listed status and beyond, including Gold Standard Certified
Impact Statements or Products are captured on the Gold Standard Impact
Registry and are publicly and transparently available to all to review.

#### 2.3 | STACKING

2.3.1 | Project Developer may potentially pursue any number and combination of
Certified Impact Statements or Products, provided that:

```
(a) All Requirements in this document and in the applicable Gold Standard
approved Impact Quantification Methodology and/or Product
Requirements are fully met.
(b) The Impact Quantification Methodology and/or Product Requirements
do not stipulate that the issuance of a given combination of Impact
Statements and Products is ineligible under Gold Standard. Such details
are confirmed within the specific guidelines, Impact quantification
methodologies or Product Requirements.
(c) All necessary legal terms and conditions are fully executed and
complied with. It is noted that certain Product Requirements may
impose particular legal requirements/come with Product-specific terms
and conditions and other legal documents, that shall be completed.
```
2.3.2 | Project Developers and funders/buyers of Impact Statements and Products
shall adhere to the Claims Guidelines as appropriate to the status of the


```
Project. This defines and directs the use of claims made in relation to Gold
Standard Certification.
```
2.3.3 | It is possible to change the project design after Design Certification to include
more Gold Standard Certified Impact Statements or Products as part of the
Project (Annex A). However, Impact Statements or Products for previously
issued monitoring periods cannot be retroactively issued, unless stated
otherwise in Activity Requirements or Product Requirements.

### 3| GENERAL ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA

3.1.1 | The following General Eligibility Criteria applies to all projects seeking Gold
Standard Certification:

```
(a) Types of Project: Eligible projects shall include physical
action/implementation on the ground. Pre-identified eligible project
types are identified in the Eligibility Principles and Requirements
section.
(b) Location of Project: Projects may be located in any part of the
world.
(c) Project Area, Project Boundary and Scale: The Project Area and
Project Boundary shall be defined. Projects may be developed at any
scale although certain rules, requirements and limitations may apply
under specific Activity Requirements, Impact quantification
methodologies and Product Requirements.
In order to avoid double counting the Project shall not be included in
any other voluntary or compliance standards programme unless
approved by Gold Standard (for example through dual certification).
Also, if the Project Area overlaps with that of another Gold Standard
or other voluntary or compliance standard programme of a similar
nature, the project shall demonstrate that there is no double counting
of impacts at design and performance certification (for example use
of similar technology or practices through which the potential arises
for double counting or misestimation of impacts amongst projects).
(d) Host Country Requirements: Projects shall be in compliance with
applicable Host Country’s legal, environmental, ecological and social
regulations.
(e) Contact Details: As part of the Project Documentation the Project
Developer shall provide (i) name and (ii) contact details of all Project
Participants; AND in case of an organisation (iii) the legal registration
details and (iv) documentation by the governing jurisdiction that
proves that the entity is in good standing (defined as being a legal or
other appropriate entity registered in or allowed to operate within the
required jurisdiction and with no evidence of insolvency or
legal/criminal notices placed against it or any of its Directors). Gold
Standard retains the right (at its own discretion) to refuse use of the
Standard where reputational concerns are highlighted.
```

```
(f) Legal Ownership: Full and uncontested legal ownership of any
Products that are generated under Gold Standard Certification, (for
example carbon credits) shall be demonstrated. Where such
ownership is transferred from project beneficiaries this must be
demonstrated transparently and with full, prior and informed consent
(FPIC).
Note that for certain Project types there is a requirement for full and
uncontested legal land title/tenure to be demonstrated. These are
contained within specific Activity Requirements or Product
Requirements. All projects shall immediately report to Gold Standard
any land title/tenure disputes arising.
(g) Other Rights: As well as legal title and ownership, the Project
Developer shall also demonstrate where required uncontested legal
rights and/or permissions concerning changes in use of other
resources required to service the Project (f or example, access rights,
water rights etc.). Any known disputes or contested rights must be
declared immediately to Gold Standard by the Project Developer and
resolved prior to further project implementation in affected areas.
(h) Official Development Assistance (ODA) Declaration: All Project
Developers applying for project activities located in a country named
by the OECD Development Assistance Committee’s ODA recipient list
and seeking Gold Standard Certification for carbon credits shall
declare the Official Development Assistance (ODA) support. The
Project Developer shall follow the GHG Emissions Reduction &
Sequestration Product Requirements and submit the declaration at
the time of Design Certification.
```
### 4| ELIGIBILITY PRINCIPLES AND REQUIREMENTS

4.1.1 | In order to achieve Certification with Gold Standard, all Projects shall
contribute to the Vision and Mission of Gold Standard, applied specifically
through the following Eligibility Principles and Requirements.

#### Principle 1: Contribution to Climate Security & Sustainable Development

⎯ Projects shall be of a type pre-identified as eligible or shall submit to Gold
Standard for approval of eligibility.
⎯ Projects shall define their Baseline Scenario and Project Scenario.
⎯ Projects shall contribute positively to Climate Security & Sustainable Development.
These positive impacts are considered against the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs).

4.1.2 | By successfully following these requirements and procedures:


```
(a) The Project is demonstrated to either be of an eligible type under Gold
Standard for the Global Goals or has sought and obtained approval
from Gold Standard to proceed as a new project type.
```
```
(b) The Project demonstrates its proposed contribution to the Sustainable
Development Goals, meaning at least an impact on SDG 13 plus two
other SDGs.
```
```
(c) The Project includes the above points (a & b) in its Project
Documentation, including the Monitoring & Reporting Plan.
```
**(a) ELIGIBLE PROJECT TYPES**

4.1.3 | A Project type is automatically eligible for Gold Standard Certification if there
are Gold Standard approved Activity Requirements and/or Impact
quantification methodologies associated with it or it’s referenced in the Gold
Standard Product Requirements. These are published to the Gold Standard
website and shall be followed where provided for a given Project type.

4.1.4 | For Project types that are not automatically eligible, a Project Developer may
submit to Gold Standard for approval. This shall be done, at a minimum, as
part of the Preliminary Review, though it is recommended to engage with
Gold Standard earlier to establish the criteria and requirements for approval.

4.1.5 | Project types applying for Gold Standard approval are referred to the Gold
Standard Vision and Mission. The Project Developer shall demonstrate how
the Project would contribute to these and how the Gold Standard for the
Global Goals Requirements would be met in their application for approval.

4.1.6 | In reviewing a new Project type for approval, Gold Standard may establish
new Requirements to be met by the Project in order to achieve Design
Certification and ongoing Certified Project status. Where required, Gold
Standard shall engage expert peer reviewers to establish these requirements,
at the Project Developer’s expense.

4.1.7 | Gold Standard does not support Project types associated with geo-engineering
or energy generated from fossil fuel or nuclear, fossil fuel switch, or any
project that supports, enhances or prolongs such energy generation. In
certain cases, concerning energy efficiency involving fossil fuels ( _for example,
LPG stoves_ ), an exception is made and captured in the relevant Activity
Requirements, Approved Impact Quantification Methodology and/or Product
Requirements.

**(b) ELIGIBLE PROJECT TYPES**

4.1.8 | The Project shall define both the Baseline and Project Scenarios. These are
defined as follows:


```
(a) Baseline Scenario: The Baseline Scenario is defined as the
reasonable, conservative scenario that would exist in the absence of
the project. While setting the Baseline Scenario, the Project
Developer shall consider the relevant applicable legislation and how
effectively these are enforced.
(b) Project Scenario: The Project Scenario is defined as the scenario that
will exist once the Project is implemented and operational.
```
```
Note that while not defined as a scenario, a consideration of the
implementation and decommissioning phases (where relevant) of the
project is also an important requirement within the Safeguarding
Principles and Stakeholder Consultation and Engagement procedures.
```
4.1.9 | The defined Baseline and Project Scenarios shall be included in the project
documentation and used to inform the other Principles outlined in this
Section.

4.1.10 | Certain Impact quantification methodologies allow projects to account
Suppressed Demand scenario when establishing a baseline. In such cases, the
application of Suppressed Demand baseline is limited to Small Scale Projects
(as defined in the relevant Activity Requirements, Product Requirements
and/or Methodology). Where a Suppressed Demand baseline is applied, it is
not possible to ‘stack’ Gold Standard Certified Impact Statements or Products
as the definition of baseline may be contradictory.

4.1.11 | For Projects seeking Certified Impact Statements and/or Products, Gold
Standard rules allow for the consideration of several potential design
scenarios in the project documentation, as long as all aspects of each
potential scenario are discussed in a satisfactory way. For example,
additionality shall be demonstrated for each one of the potential scenarios,
and stakeholder inputs must be gathered for each potential scenario. Other
relevant aspects include the scale of the project, the validity/applicability of
the applied methodology, and the assessment of sustainable development
criteria including Safeguarding principles assessment. All potential scenarios
must be Validated by the VVB and the actual scenario must be chosen before
the first Verification.

**(c) CONTRIBUTION TO CLIMATE SECURITY & SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT**

4.1.12 | All Projects shall demonstrate a clear, direct contribution to sustainable
development, defined as making demonstrable, positive impacts on at least
three Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), one of which must be SDG 13
(defined herein as Emissions Reductions or Removals and/or Adaptation to
climate change). These are referred to as SDG Impacts.


4.1.13 | SDG Impacts shall be a primary effect – an intentional, direct effect of the
project and shall not be ‘one off’ or an effect generated in design,
construction, distribution, start-up or decommissioning of the Project.

4.1.14 | The Project shall identify the potential SDG Impacts provided by the Project
by comparing the Project Scenario to the Baseline Scenario (note that
multiple baseline scenarios may be relevant depending on the SDG impacts
and/or methodologies followed). The SDG Impacts shall be demonstrated as
making a positive effect beyond what would reasonably be expected to occur
in the Baseline Scenario.

4.1.15 | The Project shall identify the relevant monitoring indicators and/or monitoring
parameters and define the monitoring approach in the Project Design
Document to inform future Monitoring Reports

4.1.16 | To demonstrate SDG impacts, the Project may choose any of the following
options

```
(a) Option 1 – For identified SDG Impacts the Project Developer
shall review the SDG targets and indicators from the relevant National
SDG Indicators, or in their absence, the latest internationally adopted
version or the latest version ‘under consideration’ where indicators are
not yet fully adopted. The Project Developer shall select the most
relevant SDG targets and indicators to the chosen SDGs or propose
indicators with justification and information that, when combined,
demonstrate how the Project positively impacts the chosen SDGs and
corresponding targets.
```
```
(b) Option 2 – Follow a Gold Standard Approved SDG Tool for the
demonstration of SDG Impacts.
```
```
(c) Option 3 – Follow the approved Impact quantification methodologies,
published or referenced via the Gold Standard website. These are
typically used by Project Developers to achieve issuance of Gold
Standard Certified Impact Statements or Products.
```
4.1.17 | For option 3, any one or more of the minimum three SDG Impacts chosen by
the Project Developer may be undertaken by following the approved Impact
quantification methodologies. Project Developers may submit a methodology
for review and approval by Gold Standard. Refer to the Impact Quantification
methodology approval procedure for details. Note that it is possible to develop
a Project and a Methodology concurrently.

4.1.18 | Projects shall seek Expert Stakeholder opinion and recommendation for
certain SDG Impacts. Those SDGs requiring Expert Stakeholder opinion are
pre-identified in specific Activity Requirements and Safeguarding Principles
and Requirements, though Gold Standard reserves the right to require an
Expert Stakeholder comment or an adjustment of the SDG Impact claimed to


```
safeguard credibility. For new project types, these shall be decided upon by
Gold Standard prior to or during Preliminary Review. When, Expert
Stakeholder opinion and recommendation is required, the Project
Developer shall demonstrate that the Expert Stakeholder has confirmed that
the impact is real and that any recommendations have been considered and
incorporated into the project design.
```
#### Principle 2: Safeguarding Principles

Projects shall conduct a Safeguarding Principles Assessment and conform to Gold
Standard Safeguarding Principles and Requirements.

4.1.19 | By successfully following these Requirements and Procedures:

```
(a) The Project completes a Safeguarding Principles Assessment as
perSafeguarding Principles and Requirements to define the relevance of
the different Requirements to the Project (note, further guidance is also
provided in specific Activity Requirements).
(b) The Project demonstrates how all relevant Requirements are met.
(c) The Project includes above points (a & b) in the Project Design
Document, including the Monitoring & Reporting Plan.
```
**(a) CONTRIBUTION TO CLIMATE SECURITY & SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT**

4.1.20 | Referring to the Gold Standard Safeguarding Principles and Requirements
document – all Projects shall undertake an upfront assessment against the
Gold Standard Safeguarding Principles and implement their Project in
accordance with the stated requirements. The assessment shall apply to the
Project Scenario, although assessment questions and Requirements involve a
comparison to the Baseline Scenario(s) and/or the implementation or
decommissioning phases of a Project.

4.1.21 | A number of Safeguarding Principles require the opinion and
recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder. These are pre-identified in
the Safeguarding Principles and Requirements Procedure and in relevant
Activity Requirements.

4.1.22 | The Safeguarding Principles Assessment and evidence of conformity to the
associated Requirements shall be included in the Project Design Document,
including the proposed monitoring parameters in the Monitoring & Reporting
Plan. The Monitoring & Reporting Plan shall capture any parameters that are
required to be monitored and reported upon and/or reassessed in the future,
in line with theSafeguarding Principles and Requirements. This shall be used
to inform the ongoing Monitoring Reports, Verification and Performance
Review.

4.1.23 | The Monitoring Report shall include reporting on Safeguarding Principles and
the associated monitoring parameters, as applicable.


#### Principle 3: Stakeholder Inclusivity

Projects shall identify and engage Relevant Stakeholders and seek Expert Stakeholder
input where necessary in the design, planning and implementation of the Project.
Project design shall reflect the views and inputs of stakeholders and ongoing feedback
shall be sought, captured and acted upon throughout the life of the Project.

4.1.24 | By successfully following these Requirements and Procedures:

```
(a) The Project demonstrates how it has identified, engaged and consulted
with relevant stakeholders. Where required, expert stakeholders are
engaged in the process.
(b) The Project demonstrates the records of the consultation and how the
outcomes of the consultation have positively influenced the project
design and implementation.
(c) The Project demonstrates that stakeholder concerns have been
addressed and any disputes have been resolved.
```
```
(d) The Project demonstrates that an appropriate system for the ongoing
capture, recording and responding to stakeholder concerns is
developed.
(e) The Project includes the above points (a to d) in the Project Design
Document, including the Monitoring & Reporting Plan.
```
**(a) STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION & ENGAGEMENT**

4.1.25 | All Projects shall conduct Stakeholder Consultation and an ongoing
engagement process. The Stakeholder Consultation shall be conducted in
accordance with the requirements outlined in this section and Gold Standard
Stakeholder Consultation & Engagement Requirements.

4.1.26 | The Stakeholder Consultation shall comprise of a minimum of two rounds of
consultation including one mandatory physical meeting and one stakeholder
feedback round lasting for at least one month and these consultations shall be
open to anyone wishing to attend.

4.1.27 | The Project Developer shall identify and inform all relevant (local, affected
and interested) stakeholders, including relevant local and national authorities,
the Gold Standard Secretariat and all Gold Standard NGO Supporters active in
the host country of the Project.

4.1.28 | The Stakeholder Consultation shall be conducted prior to the start date of the
Project. If the Consultation is conducted after the start date, the Project
Developer shall provide further explanation of how comments received during
the consultation are taken into account and implement a Grievance
Mechanism in line with the Stakeholder Consultation & Engagement
Requirements.


4.1.29 | The Project Developer shall share the information on the Project’s objective,
scale and duration, contribution to sustainable development and compliance
with safeguards to ensure that stakeholders are actively involved in the
Project from the beginning thus enabling stakeholders to influence the project
design and implementation.

4.1.30 | In addition to seeking the views of relevant (interested and affected)
stakeholder inputs, certain Safeguarding Principles and SDG Impacts may
require the opinion and recommendations of Expert Stakeholders. These are
stated in specific Activity Requirements or in the Safeguarding Principles &
Requirements. The Project shall demonstrate how the opinions and
recommendations of Expert Stakeholders are incorporated into the project
design. The feedback from Expert Stakeholders may be sought any time
during the project design and consultations, but it is recommended that they
are sought during the first phase of consultation.

4.1.31 | Where a given Safeguarding Requirement, SDG Impact or other topic requires
the input of independent Expert Stakeholder(s), this appointment shall be
made directly by the Project Developer. A signed statement from the
appointed Expert Stakeholders confirming that they have no conflict of
interest or other financial interest in the Project, Project Developer or
associated organisations shall be provided to Gold Standard.

4.1.32 | Expert Stakeholders are not necessarily required to attend face-to-face
consultation meetings but must be provided with sufficient information to
form opinions and recommendations concerning the Project. Unedited written
feedback from Expert Stakeholder(s) along with evidence as to how the
feedback has been addressed and incorporated into the Project design shall
be provided for Validation.

4.1.33 | Where the VVBs and/or Gold Standard deem it necessary, further queries
shall be raised with the Expert Stakeholder who shall be retained by the
Project Developer accordingly.

4.1.34 | The Project shall have a formal input, feedback and grievance mechanism in
place and the grievance mechanism shall be discussed during the Stakeholder
Consultations as per Stakeholder Consultation & Engagement Requirements.

4.1.35 | The project shall prepare the Stakeholder Consultation Report of the
consultation process, including consultation feedback and how this was
incorporated into the design of the Project. Note that for the preliminary
review, project developers may submit a draft Stakeholder Consultation
Report detailing the first round of consultation – if submitted earlier than one
year. This report shall include, at minimum, the consultation date, a list of
invited stakeholders, the invitation method, information shared with
stakeholders, and feedback received. Regardless of validation status, project
developers shall submit the full Stakeholder Consultation Report—covering
both first and second round consultations—within one year of the project's
start date. Note that extended submission timelines may apply for certain


```
activities, such as those outlined in LUF Activity Requirements or the Shipping
sector.
```
4.1.36 | The Monitoring Report shall include an update on stakeholder feedback
received during the period and any actions taken in response. It shall also
review the relative successes and failures of the ongoing stakeholder feedback
mechanism and any proposals for improvement.

#### Principle 4 : Demonstration of Real Outcomes

Projects shall:

```
⎯ Design and develop an upfront Project Design Document (PDD), incorporating a
Monitoring & Reporting Plan.
⎯ Undergo Design Certification (comprising Validation and Design Review).
⎯ Undertake monitoring in accordance with the Monitoring & Reporting Plan and
produce Annual Reports and Monitoring Reports.
⎯ Undergo Performance Certification (comprising Verification and Performance
Review) in order to achieve Gold Standard Certified Project status and to issue
Gold Standard Certified Impact Statements and Gold Standard Certified
Products where sought.
⎯ Undergo Gold Standard Design Certification Renewal in order to remain at the
Certified Project status and to continue to seek Gold Standard Certified Products
and Impact Statements where sought.
```
4.1.37 | This Principle represents the Gold Standard Project Cycle and the timescales
and frequency for Certification. Refer to Project Cycle Section for
requirements and procedure for Design Certification, Performance
Certification, and Design Certification Renewal including the third party VVB
audit.

4.1.38 | By successfully following the Procedures and applicable Requirements
included the Project Cycle Section, the Project demonstrates real and verified
outcomes and are able to issue the relevant Certified Impact Statements
and/or Products.

**(a) PROJECT START DATE**

4.1.39 | The Project start date is the earliest date on which the Project Developer has
committed to expenditures related to the implementation of the Project. This
does not include the purchase or option to purchase the land upon which a
Project is intended to take place

4.1.40 | Examples of the start date may include the date on which contracts have
been signed for equipment or construction/operation services required for the
Project. Minor pre-project expenses, such as the contracting of
services/payment of fees for feasibility studies or preliminary surveys, shall
not be considered in the determination of the start date as they do not
necessarily indicate the commencement of implementation of the Project. For


```
distributed technology projects, the start date is the date of implementation
of the first unit under the project.
```
4.1.41 | Note that the Project start date definition and requirements may differ under
certain Activity Requirements or Product Requirements.

4.1.42 | The project start date and the stakeholder consultation date determines the
project as

```
(a) Regular Projects, for which the Stakeholder Consultation (1st round) has
been conducted before the Project Start Date.
```
```
(b) Retroactive Projects, for which the Stakeholder Consultation (1st round)
is conducted after the Project Start Date.
```
**(b) DEVELOPMENT OF MONITORING AND REPORTING PLAN**

4.1.43 | Projects shall produce a Monitoring & Reporting Plan as part of the Project
Design Document that includes a detailed approach on the following:

```
(a) Monitoring and reporting of parameters identified for positive SDG
Impacts and associated targets.
```
```
(b) Monitoring and reporting of parameters associated with any
Requirements and re-assessments highlighted by the Safeguarding
Principles Assessment.
```
```
(c) Monitoring and reporting of Stakeholder Engagement, feedback,
grievances and any action taken, including as recommended by any
Expert Stakeholder.
```
```
(d) Any monitoring requirements and parameters in any Gold Standard
Approved Methodology, Tool and/or Product Requirements selected.
```
4.1.44 | For each monitored parameter from (a) to (d) above the following
information shall be provided in the Monitoring Plan:

```
(a) Metric or variable that shall be monitored and reported.
```
```
(b) Frequency of monitoring and reporting against each parameter.
```
```
(c) Method of collection of information and identification and details of the
organisation or individuals involved in the collection.
```
```
(d) Any quality control approaches for the proposed data collection and
reporting.
```

```
(e) Any ethical restrictions on the collection and/or reporting of collected
information.
```
4.1.45 | The Project Monitoring & Reporting Plan shall be presented as part of the
Project Documentation for Validation and shall form the basis of ongoing
Monitoring Reports that shall be presented for Verification.

#### Principle 5 : Financial Additionality & Ongoing Financial Need

All Projects must demonstrate impacts that are additional as compared to their
baseline scenario (i.e. the benefits of the Project are beyond a business-as-usual
scenario) as covered in Principle 1, above. In addition, Projects following certain
certification pathways (i.e. those seeking to use certification to attract finance or issue
market products through the issuance of Gold Standard Certified Products or Impact
Statements) shall demonstrate Financial Additionality and Ongoing Financial Need.

4.1.46 | By successfully following the Procedures and Requirements in this Section the
Project demonstrates Financial Additionality and is therefore able to issue
relevant Certified Impact Statements and/or Products.

**(a) FINANCIAL ADDITIONALTY**

4.1.47 | All Gold Standard Projects seeking the issuance of Gold Standard Certified
Impact Statements or Products shall be demonstrated to be additional,
meaning that their impact in terms of climate security (mitigation or
adaptation) and sustainable development are beyond those that would have
occurred in the absence of the certified Gold Standard project. In specific
Project types, the application of the Requirements in this section is
determined under the relevant Activity Requirements and Product
Requirements.

4.1.48 | Additionality tools:

```
(a) Gold Standard Projects shall use either a UNFCCC-approved or a Gold
Standard-approved additionality tool to demonstrate project
additionality, with the exception of specific Activity Requirements or
Product Requirements as stated in the relevant documentation. Where
appropriate under specific Activity Requirements, small-scale Gold
Standard Projects can use the latest version of the CDM “Methodological
Tool - Demonstration of additionality of small-scale project activities” to
demonstrate additionality
```
```
(b) Version of tool: The latest version of the additionality tool available at
the time of first submission to Gold Standard shall be applied. This tool
may be used by the Project until the Project completes Design
Certification.
```

```
(c) New additionality tools: Proposals may be made for new Gold
Standard additionality tools. Gold Standard reserves the right to require
changes to proposed additionality tools, seek clarification, or reject
proposed additionality tools if insufficient progress is made on
requested changes. New approaches for additionality demonstration
may also be submitted to Gold Standard for approval as part of a new
SDG Impact Quantification Methodology.
```
4.1.49 | **Prior Consideration:** The following requirements are applicable for the
demonstration of prior consideration of revenues from Gold Standard
certification for standalone projects:

```
(a) Regular projects are exempt from any kind of prior consideration of
revenues from Gold Standard certification checks.
(b) Regular or Retroactive – both project types shall submit the required
documents for preliminary review (time of first submission) within one
year of the project start date. Retroactive Project submitted at a date
later than one year from the project start date will not be eligible for
Gold Standard certification. LUF project shall refer to LUF Activity
Requirements for applicable timeline.
(c) The prior consideration rule is also applicable to a Project that
undergoes a design change. A project with a Certified Design
requesting to include a new technology/measure shall submit the
request for approval of design change to Gold Standard within one year
of the start date of the proposed technology/measures (design change
component). If the developer fails to submit the request for approval
within one year, the design change component shall not be eligible for
Gold Standard Certification.
```
4.1.50 | **For PoA/VPAs**

```
(a) Regular VPAs are exempt from any kind of prior consideration of carbon
revenue checks.
(b) Regular or Retroactive project cycle - both VPA types, with a project
start date before or after the time of first submission of the PoA must
submit the required documents for preliminary review within one year
of its start date. VPAs that are submitted at a date later than one year
from the VPA start date will not be eligible for Gold Standard
Certification. LUF project shall refer to LUF Activity Requirements for
applicable timeline.
```
**(b) ONGOING FINANCIAL NEED**


4.1.51 | All Gold Standard Projects (including those that transition from earlier
versions) required to demonstrate Financial Additionality, as noted above,
shall demonstrate Ongoing Financial Need for such mechanisms.

4.1.52 | Ongoing Financial Need shall be demonstrated at Design
Certification Renewal. The project shall provide a qualitative narrative,
supported by an overview of project finances, that demonstrates how the
finance derived Gold Standard Certification is material to the ongoing
sustainability of the Project. The narrative may include, but not limited to the
following;

```
(a) Information highlighting the key categories and amounts or relative
proportions (%) of project income and outgoings, including the relative
proportion of certification related cost and revenue.
(b) Description on how finance derived Gold Standard Certification
contributes to or is being used to sustain or enhance the project.
(c) Where no revenue is realised from Gold Standard certification during a
given period, this would be considered a FAR for the next Issuance.
```
4.1.53 | The submission of the information to demonstrate OFN is mandatory, however
this information will not be used for formal decision making to decide whether
a project shall renew or not. The information

```
(a) shall be validated by the VVB to ensure its accuracy
```
```
(b) may remain confidential (i.e. shall be submitted alongside other project
documentation and not published to the Gold Standard Impact
Registry), in recognition of the commercially sensitive nature of the
information
(c) shall satisfy the OFN requirements and no further information (beyond
responding to clarification questions) will be requested
```
**(c) STACKING AND FINANCIAL ADDITIONALITY**

4.1.54 | Projects seeking to issue multiple different Gold Standard Certified Impact
Statements and/or products (‘stacking’) shall demonstrate Financial
Additionality as per above. Such Projects shall also provide qualitative,
evidence-based justification of the need and value-add to the Project
outcomes for each additional revenue stream.

**(d) PROGARMMES OF ACTIVITY (PoA)**

4.1.55 | The Gold Standard certification cycle is suitable for multi-phased programmes
with multiple interventions with an extended implementation period within a
sector or multiple sectors, as is typically the case in, for example, urban low-
carbon growth programmes.


4.1.56 | Programmes of Activity shall follow Programme of Activity Requirements. The
Requirements in this document are applicable for a Programme where
multiple individual activities are spread over space and time.

### 5| PROJECT CYCLE

5.1.1 | Gold Standard for the Global Goals Project Certification is based on a five-year
renewable certification cycle, with key features as follows:

```
(a) All Projects must LIST with the Gold Standard by undertaking a
Preliminary Review and uploading Key Project Information, and
draft Stakeholder Consultation Report. For the preliminary review,
project developers shall submit a draft Stakeholder Consultation Report
detailing the first round of consultation. This report shall include, at
minimum, the consultation date, a list of invited stakeholders, the
invitation method, information shared with stakeholders, and feedback
received.
(b) Projects may then seek Gold Standard Certified Design status by
successfully completing Validation (within two years of the date of
Listing) and a subsequent Design Review.
(c) New projects attaining Gold Standard Certified Design status then enter
a five-year renewable certification cycle wherein for each five-year
period they must undergo Verification and Performance Review to
achieve and maintain Gold Standard Certified Project status and where
sought Issuance of Gold Standard Certified Impact Statements and
Products.
(d) To retain Certified Design status at the fifth year, all projects must
undergo Design Certification Renewal by updating information and the
baseline, unless otherwise stated in relevant Activity Requirements or
Product Requirements.
(e) The number of Performance Certifications in a five-year certification
cycle is not limited although it must take place at least once, no later
than two years after Project implementation or Design Certification,
whichever is later. In case of Design Certification Renewal, it must take
place no later than two years after Design Certification Renewal.
(f) The Activity Requirements and/or Product Requirements governs the
maximum number of Design Certification Renewals allowed for specific
project types. In the absence of any such stated Requirement, a Project
is limited to one Renewal (i.e. maximum 10 years certification).
(g) Specific requirements apply in areas such as conflict and emergency
zones as per Annex B of this document.
```
5.1.2 | The following process flow shows the Project Cycle for a typical Project
Certification:


**(a) PRELIMINARY REVIEW**

5.1.3 | The Preliminary Review (time of first submission) is conducted once at the
outset (i.e., at an early stage of project design and before Listing on the Gold
Standard Impact Registry, see below) of a Project. During the Preliminary
Review, Gold Standard conducts a desk review of the Key Project Information.
This review considers whether the Project has the potential to conform to the
Gold Standard Requirements and may therefore progress to Listed status.
Refer to the latest version of Rule Update- Revision to preliminary review
requirements and procedure for the document requirements for preliminary
review procedure.

5.1.4 | The Preliminary Review includes a desk review of the Project
Eligibility Principles as well as the applicability of the methodology amongst
other matters, based on the Key Project Information and Stakeholder
Consultation Report. It involves one of the pathways below, dependent on the
type of activity. Gold Standard shall decide which pathway a Project is
required to undertake, though guidelines are provided as follows:

```
(a) Pathway 1 – Completeness Check Pathway - This pathway is for regular
and retroactive cycle.
```
```
The Completeness Check Pathway timeline is summarised below;
i. Step 1 - The Gold Standard shall, within 14 days of submission of the
documents and the payment of the fee, conduct a completeness check.
```

- If the project/PoA/VPAs successfully passes the completeness
    check, the project skips directly to Step 4 and Steps 2 & 3 are
    not applicable.
- During the completeness check, if Gold Standard identifies that
    information is missing and/or further information is needed to
    make a decision, the Gold Standard shall request further
    information from the Project Developer.
ii. Step 2 - The Project Developer shall submit the requested information
within 14 days of receipt of the request. Late submissions will result in
the complete rejection of the request. If rejected, the developer must
submit a new request for preliminary review. If delays exceed one year,
project documents must be updated to align with the latest standard
requirements, including methodology updates and new validation or
verification as applicable.
iii. Step 3 - The Gold Standard shall notify the Project Developer (within 7
days of submission) -
- If the submission is considered complete, the project is listed
(Step 4).
- If the submission is found incomplete or further information is
required, the project developer is notified accordingly. The
project developer may submit further information anytime and
Gold Standard will review according to available capacity.
iv. Step 4 – After the completeness check, the project is either:
- listed on the Gold Standard Impact Registry or
- not listed on the Gold Standard Impact Registry. Where it is
decided to not list the project, the project developer is provided
with the rationale for rejection of the request.

```
(b) Pathway 2 – Detailed Preliminary Review – In this pathway, Gold
Standard conducts a more thorough check of the project
documentation. The application of a Detailed Preliminary Assessment is
at the discretion of Gold Standard, though typically is required for early
users of a new Project Type, Methodology or Product. The Detailed
Preliminary Review Pathway consists of a Preliminary Review period of
4 weeks, conducted by Gold Standard. New methodology refers to the
first version of a methodology. If a revised/new version of an approved
methodology is published it is not considered a new methodology.
```
5.1.5 | CARs/FARs/OBs may be raised during this review that must be addressed
during Validation. However, matters pertaining to Eligibility Principles shall be
addressed prior to Listing


5.1.6 | During the Preliminary Review step, Gold Standard may identify any further
matters that require Expert Stakeholder opinion and recommendations not
already pre-identified. Project developers must submit their response to Gold
Standard within two weeks of receiving comments. Late submissions will
result in the complete rejection of the request. If rejected, the developer must
submit a new request for preliminary review. If delays exceed one year,
project documents must be updated to align with the latest standard
requirements, including methodology updates and new validation or
verification as applicable.

5.1.7 | The Preliminary Assessment starts when the Project Developer has:

```
(a) signed and submitted the Terms and Conditions AND
(b) submitted the Project Documentation AND
(c) paid the fee for the Preliminary Review, where required.
```
5.1.8 | As The minimum requirements for submission of Project Documentation
include:

```
(a) Key Project Information and
(b) A draft Stakeholder Consultation Report
(c) Only applicable to projects with a new Project Type, Methodology or
Product, a draft Project Design Document is required that captures:
i. Completed details required for project description and
methodology application. The additionality demonstration and
monitoring plan can be summarised briefly.
```
```
ii. A summary of Safeguarding Principles Assessment, (including any
key identified risks that relate to the project type or context).
```
```
iii. Identified SDGs.
```
```
iv. Confirmation of certification pathway and any Gold
Standard Approved Methodologies and Product Requirements.
```
5.1.9 | The Preliminary Review is intended as a guide to the Project Developer and
does not represent a Certification review or result in Certification. It does not
guarantee that a Project shall be successful in Validation or Design Review or
ongoing Verification and Performance Review. Neither does it guarantee that
further issues or alternative interpretation will arise later. The CARs, OBs and
FARs are indicative only; further matters may be raised or interpreted
differently by the VVB and/or Gold Standard during the Project Cycle.

5.1.10 | The outcome of the Preliminary Review may be:

```
(a) a successful Review without any likely or potential CARs, FARs or OBs
identified, OR
```

```
(b) a successful Review with likely or potential CARs, FAR s or OBs
identified but that are not required to be resolved prior to Listing, OR
(c) an unsuccessful Review with at least one potential Non Conformity (NC)
identified.
```
```
With either outcome (a) or (b) the Project may progress to Listing, as per the
Section below.
```
5.1.11 | With a successful Preliminary Review, the Project will obtain ‘Listed’ status in
the Gold Standard Registry. This means that:

```
(a) The Key Project Information, draft Project Design Documentation,
where applicable, and supporting documentation are made publicly
available, AND
(b) The Project Developer may promote the Project according to the Claims
Guidelines as appropriate for Listed status Projects.
(c) The Project may proceed to Validation.
```
5.1.12 | Listed status does not constitute or convey Certification and does not provide
any guarantee that the Project will ultimately achieve Certification.

**(b) VALIDATION AND DESIGN REVIEW (DESIGN CERTIFICATION)**

5.1.13 | Validation may start after

(a) A project has achieved Listed status, AND
(b) The Project Developer has contracted an eligible, approved VVB , AND
(c) The Project Developer has submitted full Project Documentation and
Supporting Documents to the VVB, AND
(d) The Project Developer has notified Gold Standard of the
commencement of Validation and the indicative date for completion and
submission.
5.1.14 | Validation may include a site visit by a VVB (refer to Site Visit and Remote
Audit Requirements and Procedures for specific requirements on site visit)
who assesses the up-front design and monitoring plan for a Project against
applicable Requirements. This includes Validation of:

```
(a) The Project Documentation including the Project Design Document and
Monitoring & Reporting Plan, including any updates to the Key Project
Information after Listed Status has achieved.
(b) Any supporting document and evidence to demonstrate conformity to
all applicable Gold Standard Requirements.
```
5.1.15 | The VVB is appointed directly by the Project Developer. A VVB shall be
selected from the list of approved VVBs, eligible for the Project type and
pathway proposed. The VVB appointment shall include for responding to any


```
clarifications, queries, OBs, FARs and CARs raised by Gold Standard during
Design Certification Review.
```
5.1.16 | The Project shall complete Validation (defined as the date of submission of
Validation Report by the VVB) within two years of successful listing of the
project.

5.1.17 | Validation ends when VVB has submitted a final Validation Report with no
open NCs and/or CARs, in the opinion of the VVB, to Gold Standard.

5.1.18 | Design Review may start after a positive final Validation Report has been
submitted for Gold Standard Review (or in the case of Internal Validation, a
project is successfully validated) and the completeness check conducted by
Gold standard is successful. Project developers must submit their response to
Gold Standard within two weeks of receiving comments. Late submissions will
result in the complete rejection of the request. If rejected, the developer must
submit a new request for design review. If delays exceed one year, project
documents must be updated to align with the latest standard requirements,
including methodology updates and new validation or verification as
applicable.

5.1.19 | Design review is conducted by Gold Standard. It involves a review of all
Project Documentation along with the Validation Report and a two week public
consultation managed by Gold Standard.

5.1.20 | During Design Review, all project documentation is made available to the Gold
Standard Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) and NGO Supporters for review
and for public consultation via Gold Standard Assurance platform for two
weeks.

5.1.21 | Design Review lasts for a minimum period of 4 weeks and is concluded when
all CARs/CLs are successfully closed. The VVB shall be retained by the Project
Developer to respond to clarification requests and CARs raised by Gold
Standard. The public consultation is conducted as part of 4 week review.

5.1.22 | During Design Review, new CARs, FARs and OBs may be raised by any party.
If any new CARs or FARs are opened, these shall be addressed by either
the Project Developer and/or the VVB. VVB & Project developers must submit
their response to Gold Standard within six weeks of receiving comments. Late
submissions will result in the complete rejection of the request. If rejected,
the developer must submit a new request for design review. If delays exceed
one year, project documents must be updated to align with the latest
standard requirements, including methodology updates and new validation or
verification as applicable.

5.1.23 | The date of Design Certification is the last day of the 4 week Design Review
period, even if the design review is concluded after this date.

5.1.24 | A positive conclusion of the Design Review results in Gold Standard Certified
Design status, which means that:


```
(a) The Project Design Document, supporting documentation, Monitoring &
Reporting Plan and final Validation Report shall be made public (unless
otherwise agreed with Gold Standard, for example in the case of
commercially or personal security sensitive information).
(b) The Project becomes eligible for Performance Certification.
(c) The Project Developer may promote the Project according to the Claims
Guidelines as appropriate for Gold Standard Certified Design status
Projects.
```
**(c) VERIFICATION PERFORMANCE REVIEW (PERFORMANCE
CERTIFICATION)**

5.1.25 | Verification may start after:

```
(a) Project has achieved Gold Standard Certified Design status (it may also
be combined with validation, see ‘Combined Design and Performance
Certification’), AND
(b) The Project Developer has contracted an eligible VVB, AND
(c) The Project Developer has submitted the Monitoring Report to the VVB,
AND
(d) The Project Developer has notified Gold Standard of the
commencement of Verification.
```
5.1.26 | Verification includes a site visit by a VVB who assesses the following against
all Gold Standard Requirements including applicable Activity Requirements,
Gold Standard Impact Quantification Methodology and Product Requirements:

```
(a) The Monitoring Report (including any updates in Annual Reports)
(b) All supporting evidence and documents included by the Project
Developer to demonstrate conformity
```
5.1.27 | The VVB is directly appointed by the Project Developer. A VVB shall be
selected from the list of approved VVBs, eligible for the project type and
pathway proposed. The VVB shall be retained by the Project Developer to
review and respond to queries raised during the Performance Review.

5.1.28 | Unless otherwise stated (for example in an applied Impact quantification
methodologies or Product Requirements), the same VVB may undertake
Validation and Verification of a given Project.

5.1.29 | Verification must occur at least once during the five-year Certification cycle
with the first Verification completed within two years of project
Implementation Date or Design Certification, whichever is later. The Project
implementation date is defined as the date at which physical activity first
becomes operational, for example, the commencement of energy generation
or start of distribution of household technology.


5.1.30 | Verification ends when the VVB has submitted a positive Verification Report to
Gold Standard. A positive Verification Report shall have no pending or open
CARs in the opinion of the GS-VVB.

5.1.31 | The performance review starts after a positive final Verification Report is
submitted for Gold Standard Review and the completeness check conducted
by Gold standard is successful. VVB and Project developers must submit their
response to Gold Standard within two weeks of receiving comments. Late
submissions will result in the complete rejection of the request. If rejected,
the developer must submit a new request for performance review. If delays
exceed one year, project documents must be updated to align with the latest
standard requirements, including methodology updates and new validation or
verification as applicable.

5.1.32 | Performance review is conducted by Gold Standard following success
completion of Verification. It involves a review of the Monitoring Report, and
all supporting Evidence and documentation including the Verification Report
and a two week public consultation managed by Gold Standard.

5.1.33 | During the Performance Review, all Project Documentation are also made
available to Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) and NGO Supporters for
their review and for public consultation via Gold Standard Assurance platform
for two weeks.

5.1.34 | The Performance Review period lasts for minimum period of 3 weeks^1 and is
concluded when all CARs/CLs are successfully closed. The VVB shall be
retained by the Project Developer to respond to clarification requests and
CARs raised by Gold Standard. The public consultation is conducted as part of
3 week review.

5.1.35 | During the Performance Review new CARs, FARs and OBs may be raised by
any party, including Gold Standard. If any new CARs or FARs are opened,
these shall be addressed by either the Project Developer and/or the VVB. VVB
and Project developers must submit their response to Gold Standard within
six weeks of receiving comments. Late submissions will result in the complete
rejection of the request. If rejected, the developer must submit a new request
for performance review. If delays exceed one year, project documents must
be updated to align with the latest standard requirements, including
methodology updates and new validation or verification as applicable.

5.1.36 | The positive conclusion of the Performance Review period shall result in Gold
Standard Certified Project status, which means that:

```
(a) The Project Documentation, supporting documentation and Verification
Report are made public via the Impact Registry.
```
(^1) Unless otherwise stated in a specific Activity Requirement, Methodology or Product Requirement.


(b) The Project can issue any Gold Standard Certified Products or Impact
Statements upon payment of required fee.
5.1.37 | The project may take into account retroactive period for performance
Certification of Certified Impact Statement and /or Products. The maximum
period for Retroactive Certification is two years prior to the date of Project
Design Certification unless otherwise stated in a specific Impact quantification
methodologies or Product Requirements.

5.1.38 | The project making changes to the registered project design (Annex A) may
request Retroactive Certification for design change component for maximum
two years prior to the date of Design Change Approval.

**(d) ANNUAL PORTING**

5.1.39 | Transparent, annual update reports need to be provided for Projects that have
achieved the Project Design Certification stage or have successfully
transitioned to Gold Standard for the Global Goals. An annual report shall be
submitted for each monitoring year by end of next calendar year for which
verification is not completed^2. If a verification is in progress but not
completed, then an Annual Report is still required by the end of calendar
year.

5.1.40 | Failure to provide Annual Reports as required shall result in the de-
certification of the Project.

5.1.41 | The Annual Report shall be submitted to Gold Standard which will be made
publicly available.

5.1.42 | The Annual Report shall focus on information since the last Annual Report or
Verification Report as appropriate and provide following information

```
(a) A summary of the recent activities, events and actions related to the
Project,
(b) A clear statement on how stakeholders may provide inputs/grievances,
(c) A list of all inputs/grievances that have been received since the last
Annual Report together with their respective answers/actions,
(d) Any incidents or events that may impact the Outcomes/Impacts
delivered to date (in terms of loss) or the ongoing Performance of the
Project,
(e) Any legal contest or dispute that has arisen,
(f) Any updates to the Key Project Information, Project Design Document,
Monitoring & Reporting Plan and any other supporting documentation,
```
(^2) For example, if a project does not complete the verification for monitoring year 2019 by 31st December 2020, the
project shall submit an Annual report for monitoring year 2019 latest by 31st December 2020.


```
(g) A brief descriptive summary of all monitoring information collected
during the year,
(h) Any update of the ‘Project Participants & Secured Titles’ (in case of
changes)
```
5.1.43 | The Project Developer shall attest to the accuracy of the information provided
by its signature on the Annual Report. The signatory shall be an individual
with legal signing authority within the Project Developer’s organisation.

5.1.44 | Annual Reporting does not represent Certification nor any decision-making or
agreement to any design change by Gold Standard. Annual Reporting is
intended as an opportunity to share progress and track key updates and
confirms to Gold Standard that the Project remains active. With formal review
of conformity to Requirements; any changes in approach shall be undertaken
at Performance Certification only.

**(e) DESIGN CERTIFICATION RENEWAL**

5.1.45 | To maintain Gold Standard Certified Project status beyond five years, a
Project must undergo Design Certification Renewal. This process shall begin
(defined by the submission of a Renewal opinion by a VVB for Design Review
to Gold Standard) no later than the last date of current certification cycle.
Note that review of the Design Certification Renewal may complete after the
last date of current crediting period. In this case, the renewal date shall be
the first day after the end date of the current certification cycle.

5.1.46 | Delay in the completion of re-validation beyond the last date of current
certification cycle shall result in a reduction of any issuance of Certified
Products and/or Impact Statements available during following certification
cycle (for example, a delay of 1 year beyond the first cycle shall mean that no
Certified Impact Statements shall be issued for the period of delay).

5.1.47 | Design Certification Renewal follows the same process as Validation and
Design Review (Design Certification) including two week public consultation
though the scope of assessment is limited to:

```
(a) Changes in the Project as related to the General Eligibility Criteria
(b) Incorporation of any relevant updates to the Gold Standard
Requirements
(c) Re-definition of Baseline Scenario and any impact of change on the
Eligibility Principles, Criteria and Requirements
(d) Any Gold Standard activity, product and methodology-specific
Requirements
(e) Demonstration of Ongoing Financial Need, where relevant – see
Ongoing Financial Need
```

5.1.48 | A five - year Design Certification Renewal cycle apply to all projects though
some project types are allowed for automatic renewal for a given number of
cycles and/or to remove the need for any or all of (a)-(e) above. Such
exceptions are defined in applicable Activity Requirements and/or Product
Requirements and/or Methodology.

**(f) TRANSITION PROJECTS**

5.1.49 | Transition projects shall maintain their existing crediting cycle and maximum
crediting periods upon transition to Gold Standard for Global Goals following
GHG Emissions Reductions & Sequestration Product Requirements.

5.1.50 | Transitioning projects, maintaining their existing crediting cycle shall undergo
Performance Certification no later than the first two years after project
implementation or design certification, whichever is later, and once every
three years after that, unless the Verifier provides a convincing case for less
frequent visits as part of the Verification Report.

**(g) RETROACTIVE DESIGN CERTIFICATION**

5.1.51 | Retroactive Projects shall submit for Preliminary Review within one year of the
Project Start Date.

5.1.52 | For certain Methodologies and Gold Standard Certified Impact Statements,
the Design Certification Requirements for a Retroactive Project may differ.
Likewise, some Product Requirements require Prior Consideration of revenues
in order to be eligible to receive an Issued Product and may limit or extend
the maximum period of Certification prior to Design Certification.

**(h) COMBINING DESIGN CERTIFICATION AND FIRST PERFORMANCE
CERTIFICATION**

5.1.53 | Project Developers may choose to combine Design Certification with their first
Verification and Performance Review. The VVB may combine site
visits/consider their reports concurrently.

5.1.54 | Concurrent Design Review and Performance Review commences when the
VVB submits positive Validation and Verification Reports at the same time to
Gold Standard.

5.1.55 | Following receipt of the VVB Reports, Gold Standard shall conduct a review
that covers both the Design Review and the Performance Review following the
process outlines above, including two week public consultation. In such cases,
the Design Review lasts a minimum of six weeks.


5.1.56 | Successful conclusion means both Design Certification and Performance
Certification are approved concurrently including any issuance of Gold
Standard Certified Impact and/or Products.

### 6| PROJECT DOCUMENTATION AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENT

6.1.1 | Projects shall provide evidence of conformity to the Requirements using
approved Gold Standard Project templates except for supporting evidence and
documents. The following project documentation and associated evidence and
information are required at different stages of the project cycle.

```
(a) Preliminary Review
i. Key Project Information (see PDD template)
ii. Draft PDD including Safeguarding Principles Assessment, SDG
Impacts identified and draft Monitoring & Reporting Plan (if
required)
iii. Draft Stakeholder Consultation Report
iv. Supporting evidence and documents such as maps, survey results
or calculations
v. Signed Cover Letter and Terms and Conditions
(b) Validation and Design Review
i. Completed PDD including Monitoring & Reporting Plan
ii. Fully completed Stakeholder Consultation Report
iii. Validation Report
iv. Any Activity Requirements, Context, Impact quantification
methodologies or Product Requirements specific documentation
v. Supporting evidence and documents
(c) Annual Reporting
i. Completed Annual Report
ii. Supporting evidence and documents
(d) Verification and Performance Review
i. Any updates to the Key Project Information, PDD and Monitoring &
Reporting Plan
ii. Any Context, Activity Requirements, Impact Quantification
Methodology and Product Requirements specific documentation
iii. Verification Report
iv. Supporting evidence and documents such as maps, survey results
and/or calculations
```
6.1.2 | The Project Developer shall open an account on the Impact Registry:

```
(a) Project Documentation, PDD, Monitoring & Reporting Plan, Reports,
supporting documentation and the VVB’s Validation and Verification
Reports shall be submitted to the Gold Standard Registry. Note that the
VVB is responsible for uploading the final Validation or Verification
Report.
```

```
(b) All Project Documentation, except confidential information, shall be
made publicly available through the Impact Registry.
(c) All information shall be submitted in English, OR a language that has
been agreed upon by the Project Developer, the Gold Standard and the
VVB.
(d) Figures above one thousand shall be formatted with a comma (for
example 1,000,000), and decimals will be separated by a point (for
example 1.35).
(e) Pictures, graphs, tables and supporting documents within Project
Documentation shall be clearly marked with a unique ID.
(f) Dates shall be included in the following format: DD/MM/YYYY
(g) Maps, where required shall include:
i. Name of the project
ii. ID of the project
iii. Legend
iv. Printing date
v. Scale
vi. Direction of North
vii. GPS coordinate system (e.g. WGS 84)
viii. GPS grid
ix. Infrastructure (roads, houses, etc.) and rivers
x. Information on the satellite or aerial picture (date, resolutions,
data source)
```
### 7| NON-CONFORMITY

7.1.1 | The Project Developer shall report any potential or actual Non-Conformity
against the Requirements and any associated Guidelines, Tools or
Methodologies immediately upon discovery (and no later than 30 days after
the Non-Conformity event discovery). Potential or actual non-conformities
may also be submitted to Gold Standard by any party at any time for review.

7.1.2 | Gold Standard shall undertake a review of the Non-Conformity, including
potentially commissioning an independent investigation and an expert peer
review of any recommended action taken. During the investigation Gold
Standard reserves the right to suspend activities related to Certification
and/or Registry, including the assignment, transfer or retirement of Gold
Standard Certified Impact Statements or Products.

7.1.3 | Gold Standard shall decide upon the action taken in response to a confirmed
Non-Conformity. This may include; a requirement for immediate rectification
or change, a suspension of a Project until rectification has been Verified or a
removal of Gold Standard Certified Design status from the Project. Factors
that influence Gold Standard’s consideration of the severity of the issue shall
include, but are not limited to:

```
(a) If the issue is repeated/systematic or fundamental to the project.
```

(b) If the issue has resulted in an inappropriate certification decision or
over-issuance of Gold Standard Certified Impact Statements or
Products.
(c) If the issue has continued over a longer period of time or affects a
significant area or population.
(d) If the issue has caused the endangerment of life, livelihoods, ecology or
the environment.
(e) If the Project Developer failed to notify Gold Standard, take appropriate
steps to limit any damage or disruption caused or has attempted to
cover up the issue.


## ANNEX A - DESIGN CHANGE APPROVAL PROCEDURE

Refer to Design Change Request Requirements and Procedures for the latest

procedure and requirements.


## ANNEX B – CONFLICT AND EMERGENCY ZONES

### 1| Scope and Applicability

```
1.1.1 | Some Project Developers have faced considerable challenges in contracting
VVBs for the Validation and Verification of projects located in conflict zones,
refugee camps or areas that pose high risk to life and/or health^3. Gold
Standard rules allow all Projects under these circumstances to combine
Validation or Verification (based on a desk-review) with on-site Validation or
Verification conducted by an Objective Observer (OO) that is retained by the
Project Developer.
1.1.2 | These requirements can be applied to both regular and retroactive projects.
```
### 2| Approval Procedures

```
(a) SUBMISSION FOR REQUEST FOR DEVIATION
2.1.1 | Gold Standard will assess applications on a case-by-case basis. To be eligible
for the rule deviation described herein, there must be evidence that
demonstrates that VVBs are not willing to go on-site^4. Furthermore, the
applicant must demonstrate prior experience working in conflict zones/areas
that pose a high risk to life and/or health. And show involvement in other
activities within the considered area, apart from implementing the project
under review. Alternatively, the establishment of a formal collaboration with
partners who have such experience and involvement in the considered area
may qualify under these rules as long as the collaboration is sustained over
the entire certification period of the Project.
```
```
(b) SELECTION OF OBJECTIVE OBSERVER
2.1.2 | The Project Developer is required to identify and provide Gold Standard with
the name and contact details of three Objective Observers (independent
experts from local universities, NGOs, consultancies, etc.) who can credibly
carry out an appraisal of the project. It is preferable for the list of suggested
Objective Observers to be comprised of representatives from development
organisations that have experience within conflict zones and the host country,
so that environmental and socio-economic impacts can be safely and credibly
```
(^3) This can include situations like severe disease outbreak in a country or a part of country and where advisories are issued by
national governments / health departments notifying people against travel to a particular region/ country. For example, the
Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issues travel health notices to inform travellers about current health issues
in specific destinations and warns them about the risks associated or avoiding non-essential travel. Refer to the website for
more infor 4 mation – [http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices#](http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices#)
This evidence includes, but is not limited to, written correspondence from two or more auditors refusing to go on-site in the
conflict zone/ areas that pose high risk to life and / or health.


```
assessed. Where applicable, the Objective Observer suggested by the Project
Developer should already have authorisation to work in the specified area.
```
2.1.3 | Gold Standard will select an Objective Observer amongst the three suggested
candidates based on an assessment of their expertise or, if they do not match
the required criteria, Gold Standard will ask for other candidates to be
proposed or may suggest another expert to act as the Objective Observer.

2.1.4 | The VVB shall provide a checklist to the selected Objective Observer before
the site visit to assist the Objective Observer in assessing the relevant
aspects related to the Project’s Validation or Verification. The checklist must
be limited to issues that the VVB thinks would be necessary to check on-site
to form the Validation or the Verification opinion. The Project Developer will
be responsible for contracting with and covering the costs of the Objective
Observer(s). The relationship between and among the Project Developer, the
Objective Observer and Gold Standard shall be established in a Memorandum
of Understanding that must be signed by all parties.

**(c) SITE VISIT AND REPORT SUBMISSION**

2.1.5 | During Validation, the appointed Objective Observer is required to visit the
Project site to meet the local stakeholders in order to provide an independent
assessment of the risks associated with the Project, as well as to identify
potential negative impacts associated with the Project on the social,
environmental and economic elements of the local community.

2.1.6 | During Verification, the appointed Objective Observer is required to visit the
Project site and confirm the status of Project operation. The Objective
Observer will also assess whether the mitigation plan has been effectively
implemented, and whether negative impacts and risks have been mitigated.
Further, the Objective Observer is required to check that other negative
impacts have not resulted due to implementation and operation of the Project.

2.1.7 | The Objective Observer may make use of the Validation or Verification
Appraisal Report template provided by Gold Standard in addition to the
checklist provided by the VVB.

2.1.8 | The Objective Observer’s Appraisal report shall be made available to Gold
Standard. This report forms part of the final Validation or Verification Report
submitted by the VVB for requesting Design or Performance Certification. The
VVB may seek clarification from the Objective Observer at anytime and will
use the findings from the Appraisal Report to form the final Validation or
Verification opinion.

2.1.9 | Gold Standard will review the Objective Observer’s report during 4-week
Design Review or 3-week Performance Review.


**DOCUMENT HISTORY**

**Version Release date Summary of changes**
2.1 31/01/2025 - Editorial revisions

- Included elements from Rule Update: Revision to
Preliminary Review Requirements and Procedure.
2.0 12/11/2024 Revision related to the new assurance model
1.2 24/10/2019 Addition of details regarding project certification cycle
and eligibility criteria.
Editorial changes
1.1 01/03/2018 - Editorial changes
- Addition of details on Official Development
Assistance (ODA)
- Addition of details on transition projects
1.0 01/07/2017 Initial adoption


