_Climate Security and Sustainable Development_^

#### CORE DOCUMENT

## STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION AND ENGAGEMENT

## REQUIREMENTS

**Publication** 14 / 06 / 2022

**Version** 2. 1

**Next Planned Update** 14 / 06 / 2024

Contact Details
The Gold Standard Foundation
Chemin de Balexert 7- 9
1219 Châtelaine
International Environment House 2
Geneva, Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 788 70 80
Email: standards@goldstandard.org

## SUMMARY

The aim of the stakeholder consultation is to meaningfully engage stakeholders and
discuss potential environmental, social and economic impacts (both positive
contributions and potential risks) that projects may have during the design, planning,
implementation and operational stages of the project and to establish an ongoing
mechanism for feedback in consultation with stakeholders. This document specifies
the requirements for stakeholder consultation and engagement for projects seeking
certification under GS4GG. To assist project developers, the detailed guidelines are
provided in the _Stakeholder Consultation and Engagement Guidelines_.

Fig 1 presents a schematic diagram of a stepwise approach for conducting stakeholder
consultation and establishing continuous input and grievance mechanism.


**Figure 1 – A diagrammatic representation of the steps involved in
stakeholder consultation and engagement**

Please note:

1. Project inception is not the same as the project start date. For a definition of
    the project start date, please refer to Principle 4: Demonstration of real
    outcomes: (a) PROJECT START DATE.
2. The sequence of events depicted in the figure above is for illustration purposes
    only. A few steps may vary (or run in parallel as well) depending upon the
    project type (such as retroactive projects). As an example, please refer to para
    _3.6.13 | below_.


## TABLE OF CONTENTS

- SUMMARY
- 1| SCOPE, APPLICABILITY AND ENTRY INTO FORCE __________________________________
   - 1.1 | Scope
   - 1.2 | Applicability
   - 1.3 | Entry into force
- 2| DEFINITIONS ______________________________________________________________
- 3| REQUIREMENTS ____________________________________________________________
   - 3.1 | General overview..................................................................................
   - 3.2 | Timing of Stakeholder Consultation
   - 3.3 | Minimum group of stakeholders to be consulted
   - 3.4 | Means of inviting stakeholders
   - 3.5 | Information to be made available to stakeholders
   - 3.6 | Physical meeting(s) and feedback round
   - a. Physical meeting
   - b. Feedback round
   - 3.7 | Consideration of comments received
   - 3.8 | Continuous input and grievance mechanism
   - 3.9 | Stakeholder consultation documentation
   - 3.10 | Ongoing Reporting
- 4| POA REQUIREMENTS _______________________________________________________
   - 4.1 | General requirements
   - a. PoA level Consultation
   - 4.2 | Objective of PoA design consultation
   - 4.3 | Timing of PoA Design Consultation
   - 4.4 | Minimum group of stakeholders to be consulted
   - 4.5 | Means of inviting stakeholders
   - 4.6 | Information to be made available to stakeholders
   - 4.7 | Consideration of comments received
   - 4.8 | PoA design consultation documentation
   - b. VPAs level Consultation
   - 4.9 | Requirements
- 5| EXPERT STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT__________________________________________
- DOCUMENT REVISION HISTORY


## 1| SCOPE, APPLICABILITY AND ENTRY INTO FORCE __________________________________

### 1.1 | Scope

1.1.1 | This document sets out the requirements for stakeholder consultation and
engagement corresponding to the Gold Standard for Global Goals (GS4GG)
_Principles and Requirements_.

### 1.2 | Applicability

1.2.1 | The requirements specified in this document apply to all project activities for
which Project Developer/Coordinating and Managing Entity (CME) seeks
certification under GS4GG.

### 1.3 | Entry into force

1.3.1 | This document comes into force on 12 September 2022

```
DEFINITIONS
```
2.1.1 | In addition to definitions contained in GS4GG – _Glossary of terms_ , the following
definitions apply to this document:
a. **Expert stakeholder** refers to the individuals that hold specific expertise
or knowledge about the organisation, process, or activity being audited
and/or about the context and practices to which the project is applied. A
Stakeholder is considered an expert if the expert holds over 10 years of
relevant, contextually specific professional, academic or practical
experience in a given topic. Higher academic qualifications are preferred
but can be justified as not required if necessary.
b. **Marginalised individuals and groups** refer to the section of society that
experiences exclusion (social, political and economic), discrimination and,
for whatever reason, are unable to participate in the mainstream
economic, political, cultural and social activities. A few most common
marginalised groups are women, youth, poor communities, informal sector
workers, ethnic minorities, indigenous peoples, disabled or elderly people,
and members of the LGBTQ community.
c. **Meaningful consultation** refers collectively to meaningful consultation
and participation in a two-way process that:
− is ongoing and iterative throughout the project cycle, starting as early
as possible, and
− ensures that different categories of stakeholders are represented and
involved, and
− is equitable and non-discriminatory, and ensure that poorer or more
vulnerable parts of the affected stakeholders are given a voice, and
− is transparent and based on factual information, including the scope of
consultation and the ability of stakeholders to influence project
decisions, and


```
− encourages stakeholder feedback and engagement in the project
development, design and implementation process, and
− is based on the prior disclosure and dissemination of relevant,
transparent, objective, meaningful and easily accessible information in
a timely manner and culturally appropriate format, and
− considers and responds to feedback, and
− is free of external manipulation, interference, coercion, discrimination,
intimidation, and
− is systematically documented and relevant aspects of it are disclosed
publicly in a transparent manner.
d. Relevant stakeholder is a collective term for local, affected, interested
and expert stakeholders.
e. Stakeholder consultation is a broad term that covers processes
involving Stakeholder identification, Stakeholder engagement planning,
disclosure of information, consultation and participation, monitoring,
evaluation of feedback and, addressing grievances, throughout the project
life.
f. Stakeholder refers to individuals, groups or institutions that have a stake,
or an interest in the project activity – that may be affected by it (either
positively or negatively) or they may have an interest in it and be in a
position to influence its outcomes – such as local communities, Indigenous
Peoples, civil society organisations, and private sector entities, comprising
women, men, girls and boys. They can include, among others, relevant
ministries, local governments, locally affected people, national and local
NGOs, Community Based Organisations (CBOs), Indigenous Peoples
organisations, women’s groups, private sector companies, farmers, and
research institutions.
```
```
REQUIREMENTS
```
### 3.1 | General overview..................................................................................

3.1.1 | The objective of the stakeholder consultation and engagement process is:

```
a. to identify, engage and consult stakeholders in a meaningful manner to
improve project design and its outcomes, and
b. to inform stakeholders about the projects and discuss their likely impacts
(both positive and negative) during the design, planning and
implementation stage and relevance to stakeholders, and
c. to establish an ongoing engagement process for stakeholders to provide
input, feedback and to raise concerns throughout the project life.
```
3.1.2 | All Gold Standard projects shall take gender issues into account in their
design, planning, and implementation of the project. This requires project
developers to ensure that gender issues are fully factored into comprehensive
social and environmental impact assessments and that equal and effective


```
participation of both women and men in stakeholder consultation is ensured.
Therefore, all projects submitted for Gold Standard certification shall meet
GENDER SENSITIVE requirements (Step 1-3 of Gender Equality requirements
and guidelines ) AND shall adhere to the Gender Principles as established in the
Gold Standard Gender Policy.
```
3.1.3 | The Stakeholder consultation shall comprise of a minimum of two rounds of
consultations including one mandatory physical meeting and one stakeholder
feedback round lasting for at least one month. The following sections outline
the requirements applicable at different stages of the consultation procedure.

### 3.2 | Timing of Stakeholder Consultation

3.2.1 | The Stakeholder Consultation shall be conducted before the start date of the
project. For a definition of the project start date, please refer to: _Principle 4:
Demonstration of real outcomes: (a) PROJECT START DATE._

3.2.2 | If the Stakeholder Consultation is conducted after the start date of the project
(retroactive project)^1 , the project developer shall;
a. provide clarification on why the stakeholder is not conducted before the
project start date, and
b. conduct consultation with relevant stakeholders as early as possible, and
c. provide further explanation of how comments received during the
consultation were taken into account in the design and implementation of
the project.

### 3.3 | Minimum group of stakeholders to be consulted

3.3.1 | The Project Developer shall identify and invite all relevant (local, affected and
interested) stakeholders for consultations and comments, including, but not
limited to, as mentioned below:
a. Local people, communities and/or representatives who are expected to be
directly or indirectly affected (adversely affected or beneficiaries) by the
project or may have an interest in the project
b. Stakeholders with land-tenure rights within or adjacent to the project and
marginalised individuals and groups
c. Local policymakers and representatives of local authorities

(^1) Refer to Principle and Requirements and/or applicable activity requirements to confirm
eligibility of a retroactive project with regards to the timing of first submission to Gold
Standard.


```
d. National government officials or National Focal Point, for example,
Designated National Authority (DNA) or equivalent body<
https://cdm.unfccc.int/DNA/bak/index.html >
e. Local non-governmental organisations (NGOs), Women Groups working on
topics relevant to the project or working with communities who are likely
to be affected by the project
f. Gold Standard representative at < help@goldstandard.org >
g. Relevant international Gold Standard NGO Supporters with representation
in the region and all Gold Standard NGO Supporters located in the host
country of the project. < https://www.goldstandard.org/about-us/ngo-
supporters >
```
3.3.2 | The Project Developer shall provide evidence that invitations were sent and
comments were invited from the relevant stakeholders, at minimum, the
stakeholders listed in para _3.3.1 | above_. For cases where any of the
stakeholders listed in para _3.3.1 | above_ , were not invited, the project
developer shall provide a justification that shall be assessed by VVB.

### 3.4 | Means of inviting stakeholders

3.4.1 | The project developer shall invite stakeholders in an open and transparent
manner - that provides equal opportunity to each stakeholder to participate in
stakeholder meeting and provide feedback.

3.4.2 | The project developer shall invite the stakeholders at least 30 days before the
physical meeting by;

3.4.3 | selecting an appropriate invitation method considering the context of the
project, stakeholders, local and national circumstances, and

3.4.4 | using appropriate language and measures, and adequate and effective means.

3.4.5 | The project developer shall ensure that the stakeholders are invited in a
gender-sensitive manner. Efforts shall be made to solicit input from women
and marginalised groups.

3.4.6 | The stakeholder consultations shall be open to anyone wishing to attend, and
participate and the project developer shall not deny anyone access to the
consultation.

### 3.5 | Information to be made available to stakeholders

3.5.1 | Prior to the physical meeting, the project developer shall share information in
a manner (format, medium, language(s), etc.) that allows local stakeholders
to understand – how the project is likely to affect them. The information to be
made available to stakeholders shall include, inter alia:
a. A non–technical summary of the project, including information on project
design, technology, objectives, scale, duration, and implementation plan
(so far as known) and how it is likely to affect the various stakeholder
groups.


```
b. Summary of the economic, social and environmental impacts of the project
as per Safeguarding Principles & Requirements, along with potentially
known positive and negative impacts of the Project.
c. Summary of likely contributions of the project to Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs).
d. Other relevant information to help stakeholders understand the project
design, implementation and operation.
e. A preliminary agenda for the event summarising the different topics that
will be discussed in the physical meeting.
f. Contact details of a Project Developer’s representative to get further
information.
g. Means and methods to provide further feedback for those who are not able
to join the physical meeting
```
3.5.2 | The timing of when prior information should be provided varies depending on
the nature of the project and the local context. At a minimum, prior
information shall therefore be provided at least a week in advance before the
planned physical meeting. In some situations, such as projects entailing
higher risk affecting Indigenous Peoples, more time may be needed.

### 3.6 | Physical meeting(s) and feedback round

3.6.1 | The stakeholder consultation shall comprise of a minimum of two rounds of
consultations^2 including:
a. mandatory physical meeting with local stakeholders, and
b. stakeholder feedback round lasting for at least 30 days

### a. Physical meeting

3.6.2 | The objective of the physical meeting is to inform the relevant stakeholders of
the project details and ensure that stakeholders are provided with an
opportunity to influence project design, implementation and operation by
interacting with the project developer (and also amongst each other) and
exchanging views and concern(s) in a free and transparent manner.

3.6.3 | The project developer shall cover the following key aspects during the
physical meeting(s):
a. summary of project information as per para _3.5.1 | above_ ,
b. ensure that at a minimum, the discussion covers stakeholder’s perceptions
and expectations about project benefits and potential adverse impacts;

(^2) The stakeholder consultation Rounds may be combined in retroactive consultations, please
see para 3.6.7 below.


```
how adverse impacts may be avoided and minimised and what the
appropriate mitigation mechanisms may be,
c. potential options for input & feedback and grievance mechanism (refer to
Stakeholder Consultation and Engagement Guidelines for details)
d. information on next steps and contact details
```
3.6.4 | The project developer shall ensure that the place and timing of the physical
meeting(s) is appropriate for all relevant stakeholders and do not pose a
barrier to participation, e.g. for a particular gender or stakeholder group.

3.6.5 | Where necessary, other means and approaches that are appropriate for local
and national circumstances (and those of the Project) can be used to conduct
physical meetings. For example, if a project covers a large geographical area,
instead of one physical meeting, the project developer should organise
several physical meetings at different locations, to ensure that as many
stakeholders as possible can participate. Other examples could be smaller
workshops and seminars, focus groups, round table meetings etc.

3.6.6 | For a retroactive project^3 , the project developer shall conduct, at a minimum,
a physical meeting before project submission for preliminary review.

3.6.7 | For a retroactive project, the project developer may conduct the physical
meeting(s) combined with the stakeholder feedback round where the physical
meeting has not taken place as a part of any previously held stakeholder
consultation(s). However, the project developer shall conduct this combined
consultation before project submission for preliminary review. A combined
consultation shall ensure compliance with all the requirements outlined in this
document. Special attention must be paid to taking into account stakeholder
feedback and modifying project design, where reasonable.

3.6.8 | The project developer shall encourage equal and effective participation by
both men and women, marginalised individuals and groups in the meetings.

### b. Feedback round

3.6.9 | The project developer shall provide feedback to the stakeholders on how
comments received in the physical meeting(s) have been considered and seek
further comments from stakeholders.

3.6.10 | All stakeholders invited to participate in the physical meeting(s) shall be
invited to provide feedback during the stakeholder feedback round.

3.6.11 | The project developer shall share the updated project documentation with
stakeholders for thirty days via publicly accessible means i.e., easily

(^3) Retroactive project - the project for which stakeholder consultation is conducted after project
start date.


```
accessible online or other means for example publicly accessible website,
online platform or others. It shall include details on procedure & contact
details for submission of further comments.
```
3.6.12 | At the end of the stakeholder feedback round, the project developer shall
consolidate all the comments received during the feedback round.

3.6.13 | The project developer may organise the Stakeholder Feedback Round in
parallel to the validation process, however before concluding the validation
opinion, the VVB shall take into account the feedback and how the comments
were addressed and any potential revision in the project design and
documentation.

### 3.7 | Consideration of comments received

3.7.1 | The project developer shall ensure that all the comments received during the
consultations i.e., physical meetings and Stakeholder Feedback Round are
well documented in the form they are received i.e. with minimum
interpretation and without tempering with the spirit and intent of the
comment.

3.7.2 | The project developer shall include details with justifications, as applicable in
Stakeholder Consultation Report on how stakeholder comments have been
taken into account. The Project Developer shall provide justification when any
comments have not been incorporated or addressed.

3.7.3 | If the project developer receives stakeholder comments after the listing of the
project at the Gold Standard Impact Registry (after preliminary review),
through any channel, and before Validation, the Project Developer shall
consider such comments and make suggested changes (if required) before
the conclusion of validation.

### 3.8 | Continuous input and grievance mechanism

3.8.1 | All projects shall set up a formal input & feedback, and grievance mechanism
with the purpose of providing stakeholders with an opportunity to submit any
feedback or record concerns/grievances during the entire project lifetime.

3.8.2 | The project developer shall discuss in the physical meeting potential options
for ongoing feedback & input and grievance mechanism and agree on an
appropriate method.

3.8.3 | At a minimum, the Continuous Input and Grievance Expression Process book
shall be made available at an agreed location. Refer to detailed guidelines
available in the _Stakeholder Consultation and Engagement Guidelines_.

3.8.4 | The continuous input and grievance mechanism agreed with stakeholders
shall be described in the Stakeholder Consultation Report.

3.8.5 | The project developer shall record all comments, inputs or concerns raised by
the stakeholders using the agreed mode of continuous feedback or any other
form (such as verbally, telephonically, via email and/or through
representatives). The project developer shall send a written acknowledgement
to the stakeholder, except if the comment is anonymous.


3.8.6 | The project developer shall keep the stakeholder(s) informed of the measures
taken in the context of the comment(s) raised.

### 3.9 | Stakeholder consultation documentation

3.9.1 | The project developer shall use the Stakeholder Consultation Report template
to document all the steps taken to meet the requirements presented in this
document and provide evidence to demonstrate compliance.

3.9.2 | The stakeholder consultation report shall be submitted to Gold Standard at
the time of first submission (preliminary review).

### 3.10 | Ongoing Reporting

3.10.1 | Project developer shall provide information in the annual report and
monitoring report, as applicable, on the following:
a. Concerns that have been identified during the period of project
implementation and raised by stakeholders and the measures put in place
to address those.
b. Any feedback given by stakeholders as part of the project’s grievance
mechanism.

3.10.2 | Any stakeholder comments received after the Validation of the Project and
action taken to address the comments shall be reported at a minimum, at the
time of the next Verification or earlier as part of the annual report. If the
project undergoes a combined Validation/Verification (Design and
Performance Certification), the comments shall be reported at the time of the
subsequent verification or annual reporting (whichever is earlier).

## 4| POA REQUIREMENTS _______________________________________________________

### 4.1 | General requirements

4.1.1 | For PoAs, the CME shall conduct the stakeholder consultation at both:

```
a. PoA level i.e., PoA Design Consultation, and
b. VPA level i.e., real case & regular VPA level consultations
```
### a. PoA level Consultation

### 4.2 | Objective of PoA design consultation

4.2.1 | The PoA Design Consultation is mandatory and is conducted to obtain
feedback on the design of the proposed PoA from governments, relevant
national authorities, NGO communities, and other relevant stakeholders.


### 4.3 | Timing of PoA Design Consultation

4.3.0 | The CME shall conduct the PoA design consultation before the time of the first
submission^4 to Gold Standard for Preliminary Review.

### 4.4 | Minimum group of stakeholders to be consulted

4.4.1 | The CME shall identify and invite comments from all relevant stakeholders,
including, but not limited to, as mentioned below;
a. Local policymakers and representatives of local authorities
b. National government officials or National Focal Point, for example,
Designated National Authority (DNA)
< _https://cdm.unfccc.int/DNA/bak/index.html_ >
c. Local non-governmental organisations (NGOs), Women Groups working on
topics relevant to the project or working with communities who are likely
to be affected by the project
d. Gold Standard representative at < _help@goldstandard.org_ >
e. Relevant international Gold Standard NGO Supporters with representation
in the region and all Gold Standard NGO Supporters located in the host
country of the project. < _https://www.goldstandard.org/about-us/ngo-
supporters_ >

4.4.2 | The CME shall provide evidence that the relevant stakeholders, at minimum,
the stakeholders listed in para _3.3.1 | above_ were invited to provide comments
on the design of the proposed PoA. For cases where any of the stakeholders
listed in para _3.3.1 | above_ , were not invited, the CME shall provide a
justification.

4.4.3 | In the case of multi-country PoA, the CME may conduct one PoA design
consultation per host country or combined PoA design consultation for all
countries.

### 4.5 | Means of inviting stakeholders

4.5.1 | The CME may employ any appropriate means (physical meeting(s) or remote
meeting(s) or feedback via electronic means or other appropriate means) for
stakeholder engagement for PoA design consultation. The PoA design
consultation does not necessarily require a physical meeting. The CME shall

(^4) Retroactive VPAs with a project start date before or after the time of first submission of the
PoA must submit the required documents for preliminary review within one year of its start
date. Retroactive VPAs that are submitted at a date later than one year from the VPA start
date will not be eligible for Gold Standard Certification.


```
take into account the engagement requirements mentioned in Section 3.4 |
above , as applicable.
```
4.5.2 | The CME shall invite comments on PoA Design by;

```
a. selecting the most appropriate invitation method considering the mode of
PoA design consultation, context of the PoA, stakeholders, local and
national circumstances, and
b. using appropriate language, and adequate and effective measures and
means.
```
4.5.3 | In the case of multi-country PoA, if combined PoA design consultation is
organised, the CME shall ensure that all relevant stakeholders as listed in _para
4.4.1 | above_ , from each host country are invited.

### 4.6 | Information to be made available to stakeholders

4.6.1 | To ensure that relevant stakeholders understand the PoA objective, design and
likely impacts thus enabling stakeholders to influence and improve the PoA
design and implementation, the CME shall share the key PoA information with
stakeholders, including but not limited to:
a. the PoA’s objective, entities involved, geographical boundary, duration,
implementation plan, details of the technology/measures to be
implemented under the PoA, and
b. interaction with other similar initiatives/programmes in overlapping
geographical boundaries, and
c. target end-users (as applicable), and
d. contribution to SDGs and compliance with safeguards, and
e. other planned consultations (e.g. at the VPA level)
f. any other relevant information

4.6.2 | In the case of multi-country PoA, if combined PoA design consultation is
organised, the CME shall ensure that key PoA information per host country is
provided in a clear and transparent manner.

4.6.3 | The CME shall;

```
a. make key PoA information available via physical (hard copies) or electronic
means (emails or other publicly accessible electronic means) to
stakeholders, and
b. provide sufficient time (at minimum 30 days) to stakeholders to provide
comments
```
4.6.4 | In case, the CME organises physical meeting(s) for PoA design consultation,
the key PoA information shall be shared with stakeholders at least a week in
advance before the planned physical meeting.

### 4.7 | Consideration of comments received

4.7.1 | The CME shall document all the comments received during the PoA design
consultation(s) - with minimum interpretation and without tempering the
spirit and intent of the comment.


4.7.2 | The CME shall include details in the _PoA design consultation report_ on how
stakeholder comments are taken into account and summaries changes, if any,
following the stakeholder feedback received. The CME shall provide
justification when any comments have not been incorporated or addressed.

### 4.8 | PoA design consultation documentation

4.8.1 | The CME shall submit the PoA design consultation report at the time of the first
submission to the Gold Standard (Preliminary Review).

### b. VPAs level Consultation

### 4.9 | Requirements

4.9.0 | For VPA level consultation, the CME shall conduct two rounds of consultation
viz. a physical stakeholder consultation and a stakeholder feedback round. For
VPA level consultation, the CME shall follow the requirements specified for
project-level consultation under _Section 3| REQUIREMENTS_ , above.

4.9.1 | A separate stakeholder consultation shall be organised for each real case VPA
proposed to be included in the PoA.

4.9.2 | The CME shall submit the stakeholder consultation report for real case VPA at
the time of first submission (i.e., Preliminary review of real case VPA).

4.9.3 | A single stakeholder consultation i.e., grouped stakeholder consultation may
be organised for real case VPA and/or several regular VPA(s). The CME may
conduct a grouped stakeholder consultation as long as the proposed VPAs;
a. correspond to the same real case VPAs, and
b. are to be implemented within the same host country, and
c. are to be implemented within the geographical boundary, applicable to the
group defined for a single consultation. The applicable geographical
boundary is defined at the time of the first physical meeting of the specific
grouped consultation, and
d. are included in the PoA within two years of the first physical meeting
conducted for grouped consultation.

4.9.4 | When grouped stakeholder consultation is conducted, the CME shall:

```
a. clearly describe the geographical boundary of grouped stakeholder
consultation, and
b. invite relevant stakeholders for a physical meeting(s) and stakeholder
feedback round accordingly
c. inform the stakeholders about the validity period of grouped stakeholder
consultation (i.e., two years from the first physical meeting) and CME’s
implementation plan for the development of VPAs.
```
4.9.5 | The CME shall submit the grouped Stakeholder Consultation Report with the
inclusion request for the first regular VPA of the group.

4.9.6 | For all corresponding VPAs that are included via grouped stakeholder
consultation, the CME should during monitoring gather feedback from local
stakeholders – primarily end-users and impacted stakeholder groups on the


```
project implementation and its impacts, on a sample basis as part of the
ongoing feedback mechanism.
```
4.9.7 | The Gold Standard reserves the right to enforce new stakeholder
consultation(s) for regular VPAs that are included via grouped stakeholder
consultation, at the time of inclusion.

4.9.8 | A grievance mechanism shall be established and made available for each VPA
of a PoA.

## 5| EXPERT STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT__________________________________________

5.1.1 | In addition to seeking the views of relevant (interested and affected)
stakeholder inputs, certain Safeguarding Principles and SDG Impacts may
require the opinion and recommendations of Expert Stakeholders. These are
stated in specific _Activity Requirements_ or the _Safeguarding Principles &
Requirements_. The Project shall demonstrate how the opinions and
recommendations of Expert Stakeholders are incorporated into the project
design. Feedback from Expert Stakeholders may be sought at any time during
the project design and consultations, but it is recommended that they are
sought during the planning phase of consultation.

5.1.2 | Where a given Safeguarding Requirement, SDG Impact or other topic requires
the input of independent Expert Stakeholder(s), this appointment shall be
made directly by the project developer. A signed statement from the
appointed Expert Stakeholders confirming that they have no conflict of
interest or other financial interest in the Project, project developer or
associated organisations shall be provided to Gold Standard.

5.1.3 | Expert Stakeholders are not necessarily required to attend face-to-face
consultation meetings but must be provided with sufficient information to
form opinions and recommendations concerning the Project. Unedited written
feedback from Expert Stakeholder(s) along with evidence as to how the
feedback has been addressed and incorporated into the Project design shall
be provided for Validation.


## DOCUMENT REVISION HISTORY

```
Version Date Description
```
```
2.1 12 /^06 /^2022 -^ Minor editorial corrections^
```
#### 2.0 04 /05/^2022

- Consultation requirements for PoAs
    added
- Editorial changes
- Revision in the requirements of the
    stakeholder consultation documentation
- Revision in the minimum duration of
    stakeholder feedback round
- Expert stakeholder engagement
    requirements added

```
1.2 23/10/2019 NA
1.1 01/03/2018 NA
1.0 01/07/2017 Initial adoption
```

