### CORE DOCUMENT

# SAFEGUARDING PRINCIPLES &

# REQUIREMENTS

### PUBLICATION DATE 29/06/

### VERSION 2.

### NEXT PLANNED UPDATE 18/06/

### CONTACT DETAILS

The Gold Standard Foundation
International Environment House 2
Chemin de Balexert 7-
1219 Châtelaine Geneva, Switzerland
Tel +41 22 788 70 80
Email help@goldstandard.org

## SUMMARY

### Climate and development projects are multi-dimensional and often impact more than

### one environmental, social and/or economic aspect. This require various safeguards to

### be established and implemented to ensure that any potential negative impact is

### identified and mitigated at the right moment. This document outlines the process of

### assessing a development project against the established safeguarding principles.


## TABLE OF CONTENTS

- 1| SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY __________________________________________________
- 2| ENTRY INTO FORCE ________________________________________________________
- 3| DEFINITIONS _____________________________________________________________
- 4| REQUIREMENT ____________________________________________________________
   - 4.1 | General requirements
   - 4.2 | Expert stakeholder requirements
   - 4.3 | Supporting document and evidence
- 5| ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE _________________________________________________
- P.1 | HUMAN RIGHTS
- P.2 | GENDER EQUALITY AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
- P.3 | COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY
- RESETTLEMENT P.4 | CULTURAL HERITAGE, INDIGENOUS PEOPLE, DISPLACEMENT AND
- P.5 | CORRUPTION
- P.6 | ECONOMIC IMPACTS
- P.7 | CLIMATE AND ENERGY
- P.8 | WATER
- P.9 | ENVIRONMENT, ECOLOGY AND LAND USE
- Annex 1: Safeguarding principles assessment questions ____________________________
   - Assessment questions
- DOCUMENT HISTORY


## 1| SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY __________________________________________________

### 1.1.1 | Interventions are never one-dimensional. The interconnected nature of

### climate and project activities call for appropriate safeguarding mechanisms.

### These safeguards help projects to identify, prevent and mitigate negative,

### unintended consequences that may arise from any given intervention.

### Credible safeguards are important in both; ensuring that the developmental

### outcomes are not undermined as well as gaining public support for climate

### actions.

### 1.1.2 | The Gold Standard for the Global Goals (GS4GG) Safeguarding Principles &

### Requirements is derived from several international conventions, including:

### a. UNDP's Social and Environmental Standards (SES), 2021.

### b. UNEP's Environmental, Social and Sustainability Framework, 2020.

### c. International Finance Corporation's Environmental and Social

### Performance Standard, 2021.

### d. FAO, Framework for Environmental and Social Management, 2022.

### 1.1.3 | This document outlines the overarching safeguarding principles (Table 1) and

### corresponding requirements that a activity is required to meet throughout the

### entire project cycle.

### 1.1.4 | The requirements outlined in this document guides a project developer and its

### representatives:

### a. to identify and evaluate the risks and adverse outcomes of the

### proposed activities, and

### b. to adopt a mitigation strategy to avoid, or where avoidance is not

### possible, minimise identified risks, to achieve the stated requirements.

### Table 1 – Safeguarding Principles

### SAFEGUARDING PRINCIPLES

### Social

### Principle 1 Human Rights

### Principle 2 Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment

### Principle 3 Community Health and Safety

### Principle 4

### Cultural Heritage, Indigenous Peoples,

### Displacement and Resettlement

### Principle 5 Corruption

### Economic Principle 6 Economic Impacts

### Environmental and

### Ecological

### Principle 7 Climate and Energy

### Principle 8 Water

### Principle 9 Environment, Ecology and Land Use


## 2| ENTRY INTO FORCE ________________________________________________________

### 2.1.1 | The Version 2.1 of the Safeguarding Principles and Requirements enters into

### force 90 days after publication date i.e. 29 September 2023.

### 2.1.2 | The project developer shall demonstrate full compliance with the

### requirements of this document for any activity for which the contract(s)

### between VVB and the project developer/Coordinating and Management Entity

### (CME) is signed on or after this standard enters into force.

### 2.1.3 | Any project listed after the date of entry into force of this document, shall

### follow the requirements of this document.

### 2.1.4 | The project developer may voluntarily apply the requirements of this

### document to any new or ongoing activity for certification after its publication

### date.

## 3| DEFINITIONS _____________________________________________________________

### 3.1.1 | In addition to definitions contained in GS4GG – Glossary of terms, the

### following definitions apply to this document:

### a. Biodiversity is the variability among living organisms from all sources

### including, inter alia, terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and

### the ecological complexes of which they are a part; this includes diversity

### within species, between species, and of ecosystems. The definition from

### the Convention on Biological Diversity (Article 2) covers plant, animal,

### forest, aquatic, micro-organism and invertebrate genetic resources and

### diversity that are vital to food security, nutrition, livelihoods and the

### resilience and adaptability of global agricultural production systems.

### b. Biosafety is the safe working practices associated with handling of

### biological materials, particularly infectious agents. It addresses

### containment principles, technologies and practices that are implemented

### to prevent the unintentional exposure to pathogens and toxins, or their

### accidental release.

### c. Child labour is defined as work that is inappropriate for a child’s age,

### affects children’s education, or is likely to harm their health, safety or

### morals.

### d. Critical habitat are areas with high biodiversity value including any of

### the following features:

### i. habitats of significant importance to threatened or

### endangered species (e.g. as critically endangered,

### endangered or vulnerable species identified in the

### International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red

### List of threatened species);

### ii. habitats of significant importance to endemic and/or

### restricted-range species;

### iii. habitats that support globally significant concentrations of

### migratory species and/or congregatory species;


### iv. highly threatened and/or unique ecosystems; and/or

### v. areas associated with ecological functions or characteristics

### that are required to sustain the biodiversity in the habitats

### described above in (i) to (iv ).

### Critical habitat includes those areas that are:

### i. legally protected,

### ii. officially proposed for protection,

### iii. identified by authoritative sources for their high

### conservation value such as areas that meet criteria of the:

### a. World Conservation Union classification,

### b. The Ramsar List of Wetlands of International

### Importance, and

### c. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural

### Organisation’s (UNESCO) world heritage sites

### iv. recognised as protected by traditional local communities.

### e. Cultural heritage reflects and expresses people’s constantly evolving

### values, beliefs, knowledge, traditions and practices. Cultural heritage is

### central to individual and collective identity and memory, providing

### continuity between past, present and future. The term includes tangible

### and intangible heritage, which may be recognised and valued at the

### local, regional, national, or global level. For example, living expressions

### inherited from the ancestors, such as oral traditions, performing arts,

### social manners, rituals, festive events, knowledge and practices related

### to nature and the universe, and knowledge and techniques linked to

### traditional crafts.

### f. Ecosystem services are the benefits that people derive from

### ecosystems. Ecosystem services are organised into four categories:

### i. provisioning services that include food, freshwater, wood,

### timber, fibers, medicinal plants and genetic resources,

### ii. regulating services that include surface water purification,

### carbon storage and sequestration, climate regulation,

### protection from natural hazards,

### iii. cultural services that include natural areas that are sacred

### sites and areas of importance for recreation and aesthetic

### enjoyment, and

### iv. supporting services that include soil formation, nutrient

### cycling and primary production.

### g. Expert stakeholder refers to the individuals that hold specific expertise

### or knowledge about the organisation, process, or activity being audited

### and/or about the context and practices to which the project is applied. A

### Stakeholder is considered an expert if the expert holds over 10 years of

### relevant, contextually specific professional, academic or practical


### experience of relevant topic. Higher academic qualifications are preferred

### but can be justified as not required if necessary.

### h. Forced eviction include acts involving the coerced or involuntary

### displacement of individuals, groups, or communities from homes and/or

### lands and common property resources that they occupied or depended

### upon, and that consequently eliminates or limits their ability to reside or

### work in a particular dwelling, residence, or location without the provision

### of and access to, appropriate forms of legal and other protection.

### i. Forced labour consists of any work or service not voluntarily performed

### and is exacted from an individual under coercion, threat of force or

### penalty.

### Work is on a voluntary basis when it is done with the free and informed

### consent of a worker. Such consent must exist throughout the

### employment relationship and the worker must have the possibility to

### revoke freely given consent. In particular, there can be no “voluntary

### offer” under threat or other circumstances of restriction or deceit. To

### assess the authenticity of a free and informed consent, it is necessary to

### ensure that no external constraint or indirect coercion has been carried

### out, either by an act of the authorities or by an employer’s practice.

### Refer to the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No.29), as well as the

### Protocol of 2014 to the Forced Labour Convention.

### j. Free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) is a self-standing

### Indigenous Peoples right that was initially developed in some

### Conventions, developed in 1989 in the ILO Convention 169 and later

### enshrined as FPIC in the 2007 UN Declaration on the Rights of

### Indigenous Peoples ado pted by the UN General Assembly.

### k. Gender-based violence (GBV) is one of the most extreme forms of

### discrimination. GBV, which is widespread globally, tends to be

### exacerbated by food insecurity, poverty and humanitarian emergencies.

### The types of GBV that are of particular concern include sexual and

### physical violence; the denial of resources, opportunities or services;

### harmful practices (e.g., forced and/or child marriage); sexual

### exploitation and abuse; and emotional and psychological assault.

### Evidence shows that women and girls tend to be most vulnerable to GBV,

### but men and particularly boys are also at risk, depending on the context.

### GBV has severe consequences not only for survivors, but also for their

### families and communities.

### l. Gender equality refers to the equal rights, responsibilities and

### opportunities of women and men and girls and boys. Equality does not

### mean that women and men will become the same but that women’s and

### men’s rights, responsibilities and opportunities will not depend on

### whether they are born male or female.

### m. Hazard is a process, phenomenon or human activity that may cause loss

### of life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, social and

### economic disruption or environmental degradation.


### n. Hazardous waste refers to a waste with properties that make it

### dangerous or capable of having a harmful effect on human health or the

### environment.

### o. Indigenous people refer to distinct collectives who answer to any of

### the more commonly accepted definitions of Indigenous Peoples.

### Regardless of the local, national and regional terms applied to them, self-

### identification as a distinct people is a fundamental criterion in the

### definition of Indigenous Peoples. Other key characteristics of the

### definition of Indigenous Peoples include: voluntary perpetuation of

### cultural distinctiveness (e.g. languages, laws, customary cultural, social,

### economic or political institutions); collective attachment to the lands,

### territories and resources they have traditionally owned, occupied or

### otherwise used or acquired; traditional livelihoods and tangible and

### intangible cultural heritage associated to their lands, territories, and

### resources; priority in time with respect to occupation and use of specific

### territory; and an experience of subjugation, marginalisation,

### dispossession, exclusion or discrimination, whether or not these

### conditions persist. Indigenous Peoples may have a distinct language or

### dialect, often different from the official language or languages of the

### country or region in which they reside.

### p. Marginalised, vulnerable or disadvantaged groups refers to those

### individuals or groups who, because of their age, gender, ethnicity,

### religion, disability, economic situation (e.g. smallholders) may be more

### likely to be adversely affected by project impacts and/or more limited

### than others to benefit from its rewards. A few most common

### marginalised groups are women, youth, poor communities, informal

### sector workers, ethnic minorities, indigenous peoples, disabled or elderly

### people, and members of the LGBTQ community.

### q. Natural habitats are land and water areas where the biological

### communities are formed in large part by native plant and animal species,

### and where human activity has not essentially modified the area’s primary

### ecological functions and species composition.

### r. Non-hazardous waste refers to a waste which does not have

### properties that make it dangerous or capable of having a harmful effect

### on human health or the environment.

### s. Pollutant refers to a substance that is present in concentrations that

### may harm organisms (humans, plants and animals) or exceed an

### environmental quality standard.

### t. Primary suppliers are those suppliers who, on an ongoing basis,

### provide goods or materials essential for the core business processes of

### the project. There is no direct contractual or labor relationship between

### the project and the workers at supplier level, and costs and benefits are

### paid by primary suppliers.

### u. Protected area refers to a clearly defined geographical space,

### recognised, dedicated and managed, through legal or other effective


### means, to achieve the long-term conservation of nature with associated

### ecosystem services and cultural values.

### v. Resettlements are activities that involve physical and economic

### displacement, including through land acquisition or restrictions on land

### use or access to resources, pose impoverishment risks. Potential impacts

### may include loss of livelihoods, homelessness, food insecurity, social

### cohesion, well-being and other adverse impacts. These impacts may lead

### to social unrest and political instability.

### w. Tenure defines access and security of rights to land and other natural

### resources and affects how farmers or other users decide to use the

### natural resource; who has the right and the incentives to invest in

### improvements; and, sometimes who will benefit from the improvements

### in productivity that result from economic transformation and growth

### driven by leveraging land assets; or who may lose from changes in use

### and access to natural resources.

## 4| REQUIREMENT ____________________________________________________________

### 4.1 | General requirements

### 4.1.1 | All GS4GG project activities/PoAs/VPAs (mentioned as activity henceforth for

### conciseness) shall:

### a. undertake upfront assessment against the S afeguarding Principles &

### Requirements, and

### b. implement the activity in accordance with the Safeguarding Principles

### and relevant requirements, and

### c. include measures, corresponding to the identified risks and adverse

### outcomes, to minimise and address negative impacts, in validated

### design documents prior to design certification, and

### d. provide information on measures implemented to address the identified

### risks and status of risk in the monitoring report at each verification.

### e. report any grievances related to compliance and safeguarding principles

### that are registered at any point during the project cycle.

### 4.1.2 | In addition to meeting the requirements under the Safeguarding Principles &

### Requirements, the project shall comply with applicable national law, including

### those laws implementing host country obligations under international law.

### When host country requirements differ from requirements presented in this

### document, projects shall comply with the requirements whichever is more

### stringent.

### 4.1.3 | The safeguarding assessment shall apply to the Project Scenario, although

### assessment questions and requirements involve a comparison to the Baseline

### Scenario(s) and/or the implementation or decommissioning phases of a

### Project.

### 4.1.4 | Any failure at any time in completion of the Safeguarding Principles

### Assessment, including nonconformity with Requirements and Monitoring &


### Reporting Requirements shall lead to the invoking the Non-Conformity section

### of the Principles and Requirements.

### 4.1.5 | The activity shall provide the following information (Table 2) as per GS4GG

### certification stage as applicable to project status.

### Table 2 – Safeguarding Assessment Information

### 4.2 | Expert stakeholder requirements

### 4.2.1 | Several Safeguarding Principles require the opinion and recommendations of

### independent Expert Stakeholder(s).These are identified throughout the

### Safeguarding Principles Requirements and/or in the Activity Requirements.

### a. Where applicable, demonstrate that the Expert Stakeholder(s) has

### conducted a thorough review (and, if needed, an onsite visit) and that

### their recommendations have been incorporated into the project

### design. For requirements related to the engagement of an Expert

### Stage Information

### Stakeholder

### Consultation

### Draft Safeguarding Principles Assessment including a

### summary of environmental, social, and economic impacts of

### projects shall be made available to stakeholders to gather

### feedback during stakeholder consultation rounds.

### Preliminary Review

### A summary of Safeguarding Principles Assessment (including

### any key identified risk that relates to the project type or

### context)

### Design Review

### A completed Safeguarding Principles Assessment validated by

### a Gold Standard Validation and Verification Body (GS-VVB).

### Performance

### Review

### Each monitoring report shall:

### a. include an update on the implementation including

### information on relative success and failures, or

### improvements to proposed mitigation measures.

### b. include monitored information on indicators identified at

### design review stage, including information against pre-

### set tolerances.

### c. update information on any assessment questions

### answered ‘Potentially’ or where requirements call for

### regular re-assessment.

### d. report any grievances related to compliance and

### safeguarding principles that are registered during the

### applicable monitoring period, along with details of how

### they have been resolved.

### VVB shall validate/verify the information provided in the

### monitoring report and include opinion in the verification

### report.


### Stakeholder, please refer to the Stakeholder Consultation and

### Engagement Requirements.

### b. Where a given Safeguarding Requirement, requires the input of

### independent Expert Stakeholder(s), this appointment shall be made

### directly by the project developer or its representative. A signed

### statement from the appointed Expert Stakeholders confirming that

### they have no conflict of interest or other financial interest in the

### Project, project developer or associated organisations shall be

### provided to Gold Standard.

### 4.3 | Supporting document and evidence

### 4.3.1 | In order to demonstrate compliance with safeguarding principles and their

### requirements, evidence, as needed, shall be provided to the validating and/or

### verifying body. This evidence can be in many forms, such as an

### Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) conducted using national or

### international standards. The evidence shall support the assessment and/or

### justifications provided.

### 4.3.2 | The necessary supporting documents and evidence shall be made available to

### Gold Standard as per the requirements of any findings raised during design

### review or performance review.

### 4.3.3 | The supporting documents and evidence shall be made publicly available on

### the Impact Registry except the confidential information or document in line

### with the Public Disclosure Requirements for Project Documentation.

### 4.3.4 | If the supporting document or evidence contains confidential information, a

### redacted version of the same document shall be provided.

## 5| ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE _________________________________________________

### 5.1.1 | The Safeguarding Principles Assessment procedure set out in this document

### includes the following elements:

### Table 3 – Key Elements and Objective for Safeguarding Assessment

### Element Objective

### Principles:

### The overarching principles and rationale for the inclusion of the

### given assessment.


### Assessment

### questions:

### The safeguarding assessment questions to identify potential risks

### and adverse outcomes of the activity and to determine how the

### requirements shall be met for each Principle.

### It is mandatory to:

### - answer all questions and demonstrate compliance with all

### safeguarding principles and requirements.

### - report any grievances related to compliance and

### safeguarding principles that are registered at any point

### during the project cycle.

### Requirements:

### The requirements define what an activity shall achieve through

### design, management, or risk mitigation.

### 5.1.2 | A non-exhaustive list of assessment questions set out against each

### Safeguarding Principle is provided in the Annex 1.

**6| EXCEPTION TO SAFEGUARDING PRINCIPLE AND REQUIREMENT**

### 6.1.1 | In certain circumstances an exception to a specific Safeguarding Principle or

### Requirement may be sought. Gold Standard encourages stakeholders

### including project developers and their representatives, to understand and

### demonstrate the trade-offs associated with the project. In the presence of

### unavoidable negative impacts that exceed the Requirements and may not be

### remediated by consultation or mitigation, a deviation request shall be

### submitted to Gold Standard for its review and assessment. All such requests

### shall be reviewed by a panel made up of the Gold Standard Secretariat and at

### least two relevant third-party Expert Stakeholder(s) and a Gold Standard

### Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) member. The panel shall make

### recommendations including any changes to the project to minimise the

### adverse outcomes. The panel shall also recommend to Gold Standard as to

### whether the exception should be accepted or not. The final decision shall be

### taken by Gold Standard. Examples could include where a project introduces a

### major innovation, makes a major positive contribution to sustainable

### development or where a legitimate body of affected stakeholders is

### empowered to make decisions on such matters.


**SAFEGUARDING PRINCIPLES AND REQUIREMENTS**

## P.1 | HUMAN RIGHTS

### The Gold Standard:

### a. Recognises the centrality of human rights to sustainable development,

### poverty alleviation and ensuring fair distribution of development

### opportunities and benefits; and supports “ promoting and encouraging

### respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without

### distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion ”^2.

### b. Does not recognise or support activities that may contribute to violations

### of a State’s human rights obligations and the core international human

### rights treaties^3 and seeks to support the protection and fulfilment of

### human rights.

### c. Upholds the principles of accountability and the rule of law, participation

### and inclusion, and equality and non-discrimination, noting that prohibited

### grounds of discrimination include race, ethnicity, gender, age, language,

### disability, sexual orientation, religion, political or other opinion, national

### or social or geographical origin, property, birth, health status or other

### status including as an indigenous person or as a member of a minority.

### d. Recognises the human right to development which also implies the full

### realisation of the right of peoples to self-determination, which includes,

### subject to the relevant provisions of both International Covenants on

### Human Rights, the exercise of their inalienable right to full sovereignty

### over all their natural wealth and resources.

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

(^1) For further guidance refer to Fact sheet on Frequently Asked Questions
on human rights and climate change, 2021 , Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
(^2) Charter of the United Nations, Article 1, para 3.
https://www.un.org/en/about-us/un-charter/chapter-
(^3) These include the following, but not limited to: International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination ( 1969),
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1976), International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1976), Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women ( 1981),
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment (1987), Convention on the Rights of the Child
(1990), International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (2003), International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
(2010), Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2008).


### P.1.1.1 | The project developer, its representatives and the Project shall respect

### internationally proclaimed human rights and shall not be complicit in

### violence or human rights abuses of any kind as defined in the Universal

### Declaration of Human Rights.

### P.1.1.2 | The Project shall not discriminate with regards to participation and

### inclusion.

### P.1.1.3 | The project shall not undermine the national or regional measures for the

### realisation of the right to development.

## P.2 | GENDER EQUALITY AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT

### The Gold Standard:

### a. Promotes gender equality and the empowerment of women.

### b. Does not recognise a ctivities that contribute to discrimination against

### women or girls or reinforce gender-based discrimination and/or

### inequalities.

### c. Recognises and seeks to contribute to SDG 5 – Achieve gender equality

### and empower all women and girls. The Project shall refer to the Gold

### Standard Gender Equality Requirements Guidelines and Gold Standard

### Gender Policy f or further details in this regard.

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.2.1.1 | The Activity shall not directly or indirectly reinforce gender-based

### discrimination and shall not lead to/contribute to adverse impacts on gender

### equality and/or the situation of women. Specifically, this shall include (not

### exhaustive):

### a. Sexual harassment and/or any forms of violence against women –

### address the multiple risks of gender-based violence (GBV), including

### sexual exploitation or human trafficking.

### b. Slavery, imprisonment, physical and mental drudgery, punishment or

### coercion of women and girls.

### c. Risk that a project inadvertently increases women’s work burden and

### time poverty as these affect women’s freedom of choice and well-

### being.

### d. Restriction of women’s rights or access to resources (natural or

### economic).

### e. Recognise women’s ownership rights regardless of marital status –

### adopt project measures where possible to support women’s access to

### inherit and own land, homes, and other assets or natural resources.

### P.2.1.2 | Projects shall apply the principles of non-discrimination, equal treatment,

### and equal pay for equal work, specifically:

### a. Where appropriate for the implementation of a Project, paid,

### volunteer work or community contributions will be organised to

### provide the conditions for equitable participation of men and women

### in the identified tasks/activities.


### b. Introduce conditions that ensure the participation of women or men in

### the activity and benefits based on pregnancy, maternity/paternity

### leave, or marital status.

### c. Inform both women and men about project objectives in a manner

### that is appropriate to the local context and tailored to their methods

### of understanding, and ensure the engagement of women and men

### throughout the programme or project cycle. Ensure that these

### conditions do not limit the access of women or men, as the case may

### be, to Project participation and benefits.

### P.2.1.3 | The Project shall refer to the country’s national gender strategy or

### equivalent national commitment to aid in assessing gender risks.

### P.2.1.4 | Based on the responses to requirements above, Gold Standard may require

### that the Project seek the input of an Expert Stakeholder(s) and to include

### their recommendations in the Project design.

## P.3 | COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY

### The Gold Standard:

### a. Ensures that projects anticipate and avoid adverse impacts on the health

### and safety of affected communities from both routine and non-routine

### circumstances during the Project’s life cycle.

### b. Ensures that projects provide workers with safe and healthy working

### conditions and prevents accidents, injuries, and disease.

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.3.1.1 | The activity shall avoid community exposure to increased health risks (e.g.,

### pollution, contaminated areas/resources) and disease^5 and shall not

### adversely affect the health of the workers and the community.

### P.3.1.2 | The project shall:

(^4) Community health and safety refers to protecting local communities
from hazards caused and/or exacerbated by activities (including flooding,
landslides, contamination or other natural or human-made hazards),
disease, and the accidental collapse or failure of project structural
elements such as dams. Project-related activities may directly, indirectly,
or cumulatively change community exposure to hazards. A significant
concern with major development projects is the spread of communicable
diseases from the workforce to the surrounding communities.
(^5) Such as (but not limited to) transmission of water-related and vector-
borne diseases, and communicable and noncommunicable diseases,
injuries, nutritional disorders, mental health, and well-being that could
result from the Project, taking into consideration the differentiated
exposure to and higher sensitivity of marginalised groups, including
communities living in voluntary isolation.


### a. undertake appropriate health and safety assessment with considering

### safety risks to communities, and

### b. adopt appropriate avoidance, minimisation, and mitigation measures

### following national legal requirements, good international practice^6 and

### favouring the prevention or avoidance of risks and impacts over their

### minimisation and reduction, and

### c. ensure accidents or incidents associated with projects are appropriately

### recorded, reported and addressed, and emergency preparedness and

### response plans are in place.

### P.3.1.3 | The assessment and adopted management measures shall take into account

### differences in risk exposure and sensitivity of women and men, as well as

### marginalised and disadvantaged groups, including children, older persons,

### persons with disabilities, minorities, and indigenous people.

### P.3.1.4 | The project shall put measures in place to protect workers from inherent

### risk of the nature of their work/sector including but not limited to physical,

### chemical, biological and radiological hazards, and specific threats to women.

## RESETTLEMENT P.4 | CULTURAL HERITAGE, INDIGENOUS PEOPLE, DISPLACEMENT AND

**RESETTLEMENT**

### The Gold Standard:

### a. Promotes and supports the protection and preservation of cultural

### heritage^7 and the equitable sharing of benefits from the use of cultural

### heritage.

(^6) For example - IFC Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHS
Guidelines), available at [http://www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines.](http://www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines.)
(^7) The term “Cultural Heritage” includes tangible and intangible heritage
which may be recognised and valued at the local, regional, national, or
global level, as follows:
Tangible Cultural Heritage includes moveable or immovable objects, sites,
structures, groups of structures, human settlements and natural features
and landscapes that have archaeological, paleontological, historical,
architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other cultural significance such as
such as sacred groves, rocks, lakes, and waterfalls. Tangible Cultural
Heritage may be located in any setting and in any environment (e.g.,
above or below ground or under water).
Intangible Cultural Heritage, also referred to as living heritage, includes
practices, representations, expressions, knowledge, skills—as well as the
instruments, objects, artefacts and cultural spaces associated therewith—
that communities/groups recognise as part of their Cultural Heritage, as
transmitted from generation to generation and constantly recreated by
them in response to their environment, their interaction with nature and


### b. Advocates the avoidance of inappropriate alteration, damage, disruption,

### or removal of artifacts and objects of cultural value.

### c. Promotes meaningful consultation with stakeholders including women

### and youth, regarding preservation, protection, utilisation, and

### management of Cultural Heritage.

### d. Recognises and respects the prohibition of forced evictions and the use of

### violence generally.

### e. Recognise all land and natural resource users with a legitimate claim,

### including claimants who have informal or customary tenure rights.

### f. Recognises and fosters full respect for indigenous people’s human rights

### as recognised under Applicable Law, including but not limited to their

### rights to self-determination, their lands, resources and territories,

### traditional livelihoods and cultures.

### g. Ensures that Projects that may impact indigenous peoples and local

### farmers are designed in a spirit of partnership with them, with their full

### and effective participation, with the objective of securing their free, prior,

### and informed consent (FPIC) where their rights, lands, resources,

### territories, traditional livelihoods may be affected.

### Sites of cultural and historical heritage

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.4.1.1 | The Project shall not involve or be complicit in the alteration, damage, or

### removal of any sites, objects, or structures of significant cultural heritage.

### P.4.1.2 | Where a Project proposes to utilise Cultural Heritage, including the

### knowledge, innovations, or practices of local communities, affected

### communities shall be informed of:

### a. Their rights under Applicable Law^8 ,

### b. The scope and nature of the proposed commercial development; and

### c. The potential consequences of such development.

```
their history and provides them with a sense of identity and continuity,
thus promoting respect for cultural diversity and human creativity. This
may include, but is not limited to, a. oral traditions and expressions,
including language as a vehicle of the intangible Cultural Heritage; b.
performing arts; c. social practices, rituals, and festive events; d.
knowledge and practices concerning nature and the universe; or e.
traditional craftsmanship.
```
(^8) Cultural Heritage is preserved, protected, and promoted in mitigation
activities in a manner consistent with UNESCO Cultural Heritage
conventions or any other national or international legal instruments that
might have a bearing on the use of Cultural Heritage


### P.4.1.3 | The Project shall provide for equitable sharing of benefits from

### commercialisation of such knowledge, innovation, or practice, consistent

### with their customs and traditions.

### P.4.1.4 | The opinions and recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder(s) shall be

### sought and demonstrated as being included in the project design.

### Forced eviction and displacement

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.4.2.1 | The Project shall not involve and shall not be complicit in the involuntary

### relocation of people.

### P.4.2.2 | Projects shall avoid physical (i.e., relocation or loss of shelter) and

### economic displacement (i.e., loss of assets or access to assets that leads to

### loss of income sources or means of livelihood), and mitigate displacement

### impacts and risks of displaced persons and host communities, when

### displacement cannot be avoided. In such cases, the Project shall integrate

### into the Project documentation, a r esettlement Action Plan and/or

### Livelihood Action Plan, as appropriate. The action plans will be developed in

### accordance with international best practice and in full consultation and

### agreement with affected individual, group or community. Please refer

### to UNDP Standard 5: Displacement and Resettlement^9 requirements for

### further details in this regard.

### P.4.2.3 | The opinions and recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder(s) shall be

### sought and demonstrated as being included in the project design, where a

### project involves physical or economic displacement.

### Land tenure and other rights

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.4.3.1 | The Project shall identify all such sites/matters such as reform,

### modification, regularisation, redistribution, recording, registration, or

### inventory of legitimate tenure rights potentially affected by the Project. For

### all such sites/matters identified, the Project shall respect and safeguard:

### a. Legal rights, or

### b. Customary rights, or

(^9) UNDP's Social and Environmental Standards;
https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/operations1/undp-social-and-
environmental-standards.html


### c. Special cultural, ecological, economic, religious, or spiritual

### significance of people shall be demonstrably promoted/protected.

### P.4.3.2 | Changes in legal arrangements must be in line with relevant laws and

### regulations and must be carried out in strict adherence with such laws. All

### legal disputes must be resolved prior to the Project being carried out in

### such areas. All such changes must be demonstrated as having been agreed

### with free, prior, and informed consent.

### P.4.3.3 | The project developer shall hold uncontested land title for the entire Project

### Boundary to complete Project Design Certification.

### P.4.3.4 | The opinions and recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder(s) shall be

### sought and demonstrated as being included in the project design.

### P.4.3.5 | The project shall provide means for the affected to voice their grievances

### ensuring there is a functioning mechanism in place to receive, process,

### resolve, communicate and record grievances. (as required by GS4GG

### stakeholder consultation and engagement requirements)

### Indigenous peoples^10

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.4.4.1 | The Project shall identify all communities of Indigenous People within the

### Project area of influence who may be affected^11 directly or indirectly by the

(^10) There is no one universally accepted definition of indigenous peoples.
For purposes of this Standard “Indigenous peoples” refers to distinct
collectives, regardless of the local, national, and regional terms applied to
them (For example, “tribal people”, “first peoples”, “scheduled tribes”,
“pastoralist”, “hill people.”), who satisfy any of the more commonly
accepted definitions of indigenous peoples.
Including but not limited to those provided for in the Convention
concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries (ILO
Convention No. 169), the Study on the Problem of Discrimination against
Indigenous Populations (the “Martinez Cobo Study”), and the Working
Paper on the Concept of “Indigenous People” prepared by the Working
Group on Indigenous Populations. The core principles of the Policy are:
self determination; respect for indigenous knowledge, cultures and
traditional practices that contribute to sustainable and equitable
development; and free, prior and informed consent (FPIC).
(^11) Activity may affect the human rights, lands, natural resources,
territories, Cultural Heritage and/or traditional livelihoods of indigenous
peoples regardless of whether:
i. the project is located within or outside of the lands and
territories inhabited by the indigenous peoples in question,


### Project. In some countries, Indigenous Peoples may be referred to by other

### terms, such as ‘ethnic groups or minorities’, ‘aboriginals’, ‘hill tribes’,

### ‘minority nationalities’, ‘scheduled tribes’, ‘first nations’, ‘tribal groups’,

### ‘pastoralists’, ‘hunter-gatherers’, ‘nomadic groups’, ‘forest dwellers’ or other

### terms. Regardless of the terminology used, these requirements shall apply

### and these groups should be referred to by the internationally agreed term,

### ‘Indigenous Peoples’, when appropriate.

### P.4.4.2 | As part of the design process, the activity shall carry out an environmental

### and social analysis of the activities that may affect or involve Indigenous

### Peoples. The analysis shall verify whether Indigenous Peoples reside in the

### proposed project areas and/or if the activities may affect Indigenous

### Peoples outside of project areas. The assessment shall include the potential

### impacts on their rights, lands, territories, gender relations and resources.

### P.4.4.3 | The project shall not result in the forced eviction of indigenous people from

### their lands and territories.

### P.4.4.4 | The project developer shall recognise and respect the indigenous people’s

### collective rights to own, use, and develop and control the lands, resources

### and territories that they have traditionally owned, occupied or otherwise

### used or acquired, including lands and territories for which they do not yet

### possess title.

### P.4.4.5 | The project developer shall respect, protect, conserve and shall not take the

### cultural, intellectual, religious, and/or spiritual property of indigenous

### people without their free, prior and informed consent (FPIC)^12.

### P.4.4.6 | The project developer shall ensure that the indigenous people are provided

### with the equitable sharing of benefits to be derived from utilisation and/or

### commercial development of natural resources on lands and territories or use

### of their traditional knowledge and practices by the Project. This shall be

### done in a manner that is culturally appropriate and inclusive and that does

### not impede land rights or equal access to basic services including health

### services, clean water, energy, education, safe and decent working

### conditions, and housing.

```
ii. a title is possessed by the affected indigenous peoples over
the lands and territories in question, or
iii. the indigenous peoples are recognised as indigenous
peoples by the country in question.
```
(^12) All three elements within FPIC are interconnected and are part of the
whole. Consent shall be sought before any project, plan or action takes
place (prior); it shall be independently decided upon (free); and based on
accurate, timely and sufficient information provided in a culturally
appropriate way (informed) for it to be considered a valid result or
outcome of a collective decision-making process.


### P.4.4.7 | If it is determined that the proposed project may affect the rights, lands,

### resources, or territories of indigenous people, an "Indigenous People Plan"

### (IPP)^13 or “Indigenous People Plan Framework” shall be elaborated and

### included in the project documentation. This plan shall be developed in

### accordance with the effective and meaningful participation of indigenous

### peoples and in accordance with UNDP Guidelines^14.

### P.4.4.8 | As accordance to GS4GG stakeholder consultation and engagement

### requirements, projects shall make available mutually agreed, culturally

### appropriate, accessible and inclusive channels for feedback and grievance

### redress to Indigenous Peoples and their representatives. The grievance

### mechanism shall be established at the beginning of programme or project

### implementation with due consideration given to customary dispute

### settlement mechanisms among the Indigenous Peoples concerned and

### remain operational throughout the project cycle. A conflict resolution

### mechanism should be also discussed, agreed and developed during the

### early stages of the programme or project cycle.

### P.4.4.9 | The opinions and recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder(s) shall be

### sought and demonstrated as being included in the project design.

## P.5 | CORRUPTION

### The Gold Standard does not recognise Projects that engage in, contribute to, or

### reinforce corruption of any kind.

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.5.1.1 | The Project shall not involve, be complicit in or inadvertently contribute to

### or reinforce corruption or corrupt practices.

## P.6 | ECONOMIC IMPACTS

### The Gold Standard:

### a. Promotes equitable, sustainable economic growth and stability and

### Projects that are appropriate and considerate of the economic situation in

### which they are developed.

(^13) The IPP shall identify potential risks and impacts, risk avoidance and
mitigation measures, and specify measures for provision of culturally
appropriate benefits, continued consultation and participation processes,
grievance procedures, monitoring and evaluation procedures, and a
budget and financial plan for implementing agreed measures. In no case
shall activities that may adversely affect indigenous peoples, including the
existence, value, use or enjoyment of their lands, resources or territories
take place before the action plan is carried out.
(^14) UNDP SES Guidance Note Standard 6 Indigenous Peoples


### b. Ensures that projects respect and promote fundamental principles and

### rights at work^15 , promote the right to decent work, fair treatment, non-

### discrimination, and equal opportunity for workers, and prevent the use of

### forced labour and/or child labour.

### c. Ensure projects comply with national employment and labour laws and

### international commitments.

### d. Prioritises appropriate and properly considered local employment and

### procurement wherever possible.

### e. Recognises the principle ‘leave no one behind’ by protecting and

### supporting workers at heightened risk, with a special focus, as

### appropriate, on women workers, young workers, migrant workers,

### workers in the informal economy and workers with disabilities.

### f. Ensures safe and healthy working conditions, and the health of workers.

### Labour Rights and Working Conditions

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.6.1.1 | The project developer shall ensure that there is no forced labour16,^17 and

### that all employment is in compliance with national labour and occupational

### health and safety laws, with obligations under international law, and

(^15) These principles and rights are articulated in the ILO Declaration on
Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work (1998).
(^16) This prohibition covers any kind of involuntary or compulsory labour,
such as indentured labour, bonded labour, or similar labour-contracting
arrangements. No trafficked persons may be employed in connection with
the project activities.
Trafficking in persons is defined as the recruitment, transportation,
transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons by means of the threat or use
of force or other forms of coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, abuse of
power, or of a position of vulnerability, or of the giving or receiving of
payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control
over another person, for the purposes of exploitation. Women and
children are particularly vulnerable to trafficking practices.
(^17) Forced labour which consists of any work or service not voluntarily
performed that is exacted from an individual under threat of force or
penalty, shall not be used in connection with the project. Where cases of
forced labour are identified, immediate steps shall be taken to correct and
remedy them.


### consistency with the principles and standards embodied in the International

### Labour Organisation (ILO) fundamental conventions^18 ,^19. It requires that:

### a. Workers shall be able to establish and join labour organisations.

### b. Working agreements with all individual workers shall be documented and

### implemented. These shall, at minimum, comprise:

### i. Working hours (must not exceed 48 hours per week on a regular

### basis), AND

### ii. Duties and tasks, AND

### iii. Remuneration (must include provision for payment of overtime),

### AND

### iv. Modalities on health insurance, AND

### v. Modalities on termination of the contract with provision for

### voluntary resignation by employee, AND

### vi. Provision for annual leave of not less than 10 days per year, not

### including sick and casual leave, AND

### vii. Provision for maternity leave, vacation, or holidays

### c. Where such agreements do not exist, or do not address working

### conditions and terms of employment^20 , the project developer shall

### provide reasonable working conditions and terms of employment^21.

### d. Where migrant workers are engaged, the project developer shall ensure

### that they are engaged on substantially equivalent terms and conditions

### to non-migrant workers carrying out similar work.

(^18) ILO Conventions Nos. 29 and 105 (forced and bonded labour), 87
(freedom of association), 98 (right to collective bargaining), 100 and 111
(discrimination), 138 (minimum age), 182 (worst forms of child labour).
(^19) Where these are contradictory and a breach of one or other cannot be
avoided, guidance shall be sought from Gold Standard.
(^20) Working conditions and terms of employment examples are wages and
benefits; wage deductions; hours of work; overtime arrangements and
overtime compensation; breaks; rest days; and leave for illness,
maternity, vacation, or holiday.
(^21) Reasonable working conditions and terms of employment could be
assessed by reference to i. conditions established for work of the same
character in the trade or industry concerned in the area/region where the
work is carried out. ii. collective agreement or other recognised
ne gotiation between other organisations of employers and workers’
representatives in the trade or industry concerned, iii. arbitration award;
or iv. conditions established by national law.


### e. Where accommodation services^22 are provided to workers covered by

### the scope of this Principle, the project developer shall put in place and

### implement policies on the quality and management of the

### accommodation and provision of basic services^23. The accommodation

### services will be provided in a manner consistent with the principles of

### non-discrimination and equal opportunity. Workers’ accommodation

### arrangements should not restrict workers’ freedom of movement or of

### association.

### P.6.1.2 | The employment decisions shall be based on Principle of equal opportunity

### and fair treatment. T he project:

### a. shall not make employment decision based on gender, race,

### nationality, ethnic, social, and indigenous origin, religion or belief,

### disability, age, or sexual orientation - unrelated to inherent job

### requirements.

### b. shall not discriminate with respect to any aspects of the employment

### relationship, such as recruitment and hiring, compensation (including

### wages and benefits), working conditions and terms of employment,

### access to training, job assignment, promotion, termination of

### employment or retirement, and disciplinary practices.

### c. shall take measures to prevent and address harassment, intimidation,

### and/or exploitation, especially in regard to women. The principles of

### non-discrimination apply to migrant workers.

### P.6.1.3 | Th e project shall comply with national law, where national law provides

### provision to address non-discrimination in employment. When national laws

### are silent on non-discrimination in employment, the project shall meet the

### requirements outlined in this document. In circumstances where national

### law is inconsistent with this Standard, the project developer is encouraged

### to carry out its operations consistent with the intent of paragraph P.6.1.2

### above without contravening applicable laws.

### P.6.1.4 | Child labour, as defined by the ILO Minimum Age Convention (No.

### 138)^24 and ILO Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999, (No. 182) is

(^22) Those services might be provided either directly by the project
developer or by third parties.
(^23) Basic services requirements refer to minimum space, supply of water,
adequate sewage and garbage disposal system, appropriate protection
against heat, cold, damp, noise, fire, and disease-carrying animals,
adequate sanitary and washing facilities, ventilation, cooking and storage
facilities and natural and artificial lighting, and in some cases basic
medical services.
(^24) ILO Conventions and Recommendations on child labour; To be
consistent with the ILO Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138), the


### not allowed. The project developer shall use adequate and verifiable

### mechanisms for age verification in recruitment procedures and validated

### and verified by VVB.

### P.6.1.5 | A child under the age of eighteen shall not perform work in connection with

### or arising from the activities which, by its nature or the circumstances in

### which it is carried out, is likely to harm his/her health, safety or morals.

### Such work is determined by national laws or regulations or by the

### competent authority and commonly specified in national lists of hazardous

### work prohibited to children. In the absence of such regulations, guidance on

### hazardous work to be prohibited in connection with the project should

### derive from the relevant ILO instruments^25. In addition, a child under the

### age of eighteen shall not, in connection with project activities, perform work

### that is likely to interfere with his/her compulsory education or be harmful to

### his/her physical, mental, spiritual, moral, or social development.

### P.6.1.6 | Exceptions are children for work on their families’ property as long as:

### a. Their compulsory schooling (minimum of 6 schooling years) is not

### hindered, AND

### b. The tasks they perform do not harm their physical, mental, spiritual,

### moral, or social development, AND

### c. The opinions and recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder shall be

### sought and demonstrated as being included in the project design.

### P.6.1.7 | The project developer shall implement necessary processes and measures

### that address the safety and health of project workers shall be in place to

### support project design, planning and implementation. These processes and

### measures may be encompassed and implemented through the applicable

```
applicable minimum age shall not be less than the age of completion of
compulsory schooling and, in principle, not less than 15 years.
```
(^25) Refer to ILO Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182)
and ILO Worst Forms of Child Labour Recommendation, 1999 (No. 190).
Examples of hazardous work activities prohibited for children include
work: (a) with exposure to physical, psychological or sexual abuse; (b)
underground, underwater, working at heights or in confined spaces; (c)
with dangerous machinery, equipment or tools, or involving handling or
transport of heavy loads; (d) in unhealthy environments exposing
children to hazardous substances, agents, or processes, or to
temperatures, noise or vibration damaging to health; or (e) under
particularly difficult conditions such as work for long hours, during the
night or in unreasonable confinement on the premises of the employer.


### occupational safety and health management system^26 or processes and

### shall address:

### a. Identification and assessment of potential hazards and risks,

### particularly those that could result in severe injury, ill health or death

### and those identified through worker health surveillance.

### b. Elimination of hazards and minimisation of risks through

### implementation of preventive and protective measures in the

### following order of priority: elimination or substitution, engineering and

### organisational controls, administrative controls, and where residual

### hazards and risks cannot be controlled through these collective

### measures, provision of personal protective equipment at no cost to

### the worker.

### c. Safety and health training, including on the proper use and

### maintenance of personal protective equipment conducted by

### competent persons and the maintenance of training records;

### d. Recording and documenting accidents, disease, incidents and any

### resulting injuries, ill health, or death,

### e. Emergency prevention and preparedness and response measures to

### address emergency situations,

### f. Employment injury benefits and/or remedies for adverse impacts such

### as occupational injuries, disability, ill health or disease and death.

### P.6.1.8 | The project developer and relevant parties who employ or engage project

### workers shall put in place the above safety and health processes and

### measures to prevent and protect workers from chemical, physical,

### biological, and psychosocial hazards and to establish and maintain safe and

### healthy workplaces including the work environment, organisation,

### processes, tools machinery and equipment.

### P.6.1.9 | The project developer shall implement appropriate measures

### a. to protect and provide assistance to address the vulnerabilities of

### project workers, including specific groups of workers, such as women,

### persons with disabilities, migrant workers, and young workers. AND

### b. to prevent and address any form of violence and harassment,

### bullying, intimidation and/or exploitation, including any form of

### gender-based violence (GBV).

(^26) ILO Guidelines on Occupational Safety and Health Management systems, 2001. See also
United Nations Common System Occupational Safety and Health Framework, Chief Executives
Board, 31 March 2015


### P.6.1.10 | In accordance to the GS4GG stakeholder engagement requirements, the

### project developer shall provide access to workers (and their organisations,

### where they exist) to grievance mechanism to raise workplace concerns of

### violations of existing rights and entitlements as provided for in legislation,

### collective agreements, employment contracts and human resources policies.

### The project developer shall inform the workers of the grievance mechanism

### at the time of recruitment and make accessible to them. Measures shall be

### put in place to make the grievance mechanism easily accessible to all

### workers.

### P.6.1.11 | Where project workers are engaged by third parties, the project developer

### shall

### a. put in place mechanism e.g. due diligence that includes an

### examination of the past and current labour practices of the contractor

### or third party, and audits to ascertain that third parties who engage

### workers are legitimate and reliable and have in place appropriate

### policies, processes and systems that allow them to operate in

### accordance with the minimum requirements herein.

### b. establish policies and procedures for managing and monitoring the

### performance of such third-party employers in relation to the

### minimum requirements herein.

### P.6.1.12 | Where project’s primary suppliers (supply chain workers) are involved, in a

### sector known for involving child or forced labour or significant safety

### violations, the project developer shall

### a. assess if there are any incidents of child labour, forced labour or

### significant safety issues.

### b. monitor its primary supply chain on an ongoing basis and take

### corrective action to remedy if new risks or incidents of child and/or

### forced labour are identified.

### Negative economic consequences

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.6.2.1 | The project developer shall ensure the financial sustainability of the Project

### implemented, also including those that will occur beyond the project

### certification period.

### P.6.2.2 | The Projects shall consider economic impacts and potential risks to the local

### economy. Particular attention shall be given to vulnerable and marginalised

### social groups in targeted communities and that benefits are socially

### inclusive and sustainable.

## P.7 | CLIMATE AND ENERGY

### The Gold Standard:

### a. Promotes climate security (mitigation and adaptation) and sustainable

### development.

### b. Promotes sustainable use of energy.


### GHG Emissions

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.7.1.1 | Projects shall not increase greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) over the

### Baseline Scenario unless this is specifically allowed within Activity

### Requirements or Gold Standard approved SDG i mpact quantification

### methodologies.

### Energy supply

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.7.2.1 | The Project shall not affect the availability and reliability of energy supply to

### other users.

## P.8 | WATER

### The Gold Standard:

### Promotes sustainable and efficient use of waste resources to avoid adverse impacts on

### water resources and water-related ecosystems, including mountains, coasts, oceans,

### forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes.

### Impact on Natural Water Patterns/Flows

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.8.1.1 | The Project shall ensure that water resources are conserved.

### a. For surface waters this means:

### i. Maintaining credible environmental flows, demonstrated by

### providing a verifiable calculation that shows water flows

### are maintained, and

### ii. Ensuring that any discharged wastewater is of a high enough

### standard to allow beneficial reuse.

### b. For ground water this means:

### i. limiting abstractions to levels less than, or equal to, rates of

### recharge. Managed aquifer recharge may be used to conserve

### groundwater resources.

### P.8.1.2 | The opinions and recommendations of Expert Stakeholder(s) that help

### demonstrate compliance with the above shall be included in the project

### design and monitoring plan, where a risk exists.

### Erosion and/or water body instability

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.8.2.1 | The risk of the Project negatively impacting the catchment shall be assessed

### and addressed.

### P.8.2.2 | The Project shall demonstrate that measures will be undertaken to ensure

### that surface and ground waters are protected from erosion and that these

### measures are in place prior to the commencement of the Project.


### P.8.2.3 | The Project shall demonstrate that measures to ensure soil protection and

### minimised erosion are in place prior to the commencement of the Project.

### P.8.2.4 | Measures shall be incorporated to reduce soil erosion on slopes (e.g., hedge

### and tree rows, natural terracing, infiltration strips, permanent ground

### cover). For these measures, the concept of the effective slope length shall

### be taken into account.

### P.8.2.5 | The success of measures shall be reassessed at a frequency appropriate to

### the context of the ecosystem affected.

### P.8.2.6 | The opinions and recommendations of Expert Stakeholder(s) that help

### demonstrate compliance with the above shall be included in the project

### design and monitoring plan.

## P.9 | ENVIRONMENT, ECOLOGY AND LAND USE

### The Gold Standard:

### a. promotes sustainable management, protection, conservation,

### maintenance and rehabilitation of natural habitats and their

### associated biodiversity and ecosystem functions.

### b. Ensures a precautionary approach to natural resource conservation

### and avoids negative environmental impacts.

### Landscape modification and soil

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.9.1.1 | The Project shall identify the functions and services provided by the

### landscape and demonstrate no net degradation of soil resources and the

### loss of ecosystem services provided by soils.

### P.9.1.2 | To ensure healthy soil, appropriate measures shall be put in place to

### minimise adverse impacts on soil, their biodiversity, organic content,

### productivity, structure, and water-retention capacity.

### P.9.1.3 | Measures shall be incorporated to minimise soil degradation (e.g., through

### crop rotation, composting, no use of heavy machinery, use of N-fixing

### plants, reduced tillage, no use of ecologically harmful substances).

### P.9.1.4 | Projects that involve the production, harvesting, and/or management of

### living natural resources by small-scale landholders and/or local communities

### shall adopt the appropriate and culturally sensitive sustainable resource

### management practices.

### Vulnerability to natural disaster

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.9.2.1 | The Project shall avoid or minimise the exacerbation of impacts caused by

### natural or man-made hazards, such as landslides or floods that could result

### from land use changes due to Projects.

### P.9.2.2 | The project developer shall include mitigation measures (if possible), the

### emergency preparedness plan and response strategies. The project


### developer shall disclose appropriate information about emergency

### preparedness and response Projects, resources, and responsibilities to

### affected communities.

### Biosafety and genetic resources

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.9.3.1 | The projects that may involve the transfer, handling and use of genetically

### modified organisms/living modified organisms (GMOs/LMOs) that result

### from modern biotechnology and that may have adverse effects on biological

### diversity, the project developer shall ensure that a risk assessment by a

### competent Expert stakeholder is carried out in accordance with Annex III of

### the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological

### Diversity.

### P.9.3.2 | The project developer shall ensure that projects involving GMOs/LMOs

### include measures to manage any risks identified in the risk assessment.

### P.9.3.3 | Forestry projects (for example Afforestation/Reforestation) involving GMO

### planting are not eligible for Certification under Gold Standard for the Global

### Goals.

### Release of pollutants

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.9.4.1 | The Project shall avoid the release of pollutants^27 from routine, non-routine,

### and accidental releases. If emissions cannot be avoided, the project shall

### minimise and control the intensity and flow. This applies to the release of

### pollutants to air, water, and land due to routine, non-routine, and accidental

### circumstances^28.

### P.9.4.2 | The project developer shall ensure that pollution prevention^29 and control

### technologies and practices consistent with national regulation or

### international good practice are applied during the Project life cycle.

(^27) The term “pollution” refers to both hazardous and non-hazardous
pollutants in the solid, liquid, or gaseous phases, and includes other
components such as pests, pathogens, thermal discharge to water, GHG
emissions, nuisance odours, noise, vibration, radiation, electromagnetic
energy, and the creation of potential visual impacts including light.
(^28) Including those covered under the Convention on Long-range
Transboundary Air Pollution, available at https://unece.org/convention-
and-its -achievements
(^29) T he term “pollution prevention” does not mean absolute elimination of
emissions, but the avoidance at source whenever possible, and, if not


### P.9.4.3 | All potential pollution sources that may result from the Project that cause

### the degradation of the quality of soil, air, surface, and groundwater within

### the Project’s area of influence shall be identified. Appropriate mitigation

### measures and monitoring shall be implemented to ensure the protection of

### resources. The recommended methods include quantitative documentation

### of all sources and volumes of water abstractions, use of weirs and gauges,

### flow meters, pump energy consumption, transpiration rates, government

### data. The project can use historical records, ongoing monitoring, and

### reporting through data logging of physical measurements, online sources,

### government data.

### Hazardous and non-hazardous waste

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.9.5.1 | The project developer shall avoid the generation of hazardous and non-

### hazardous waste materials and implement a waste management hierarchy

### that prioritises the avoidance of the generation of waste. Where waste

### generation may not be avoided,

### a. The Project shall minimise waste generation and wastes shall be

### recovered, recycled and reused in a safe manner.

### b. Where waste may not be recovered or reused, it shall be treated,

### destroyed, or disposed of in an environmentally sound manner

### that includes the appropriate control of emissions and residues

### resulting from the handling and processing of the waste material.

### P.9.5.2 | If the generated waste is considered hazardous^30 , reasonable alternatives

### for its environmentally sound disposal shall be adopted while adhering to

### the limitations applicable to its transboundary movement^31.

### P.9.5.3 | Projects shall avoid or, when avoidance is not feasible, minimise and control

### release of hazardous materials resulting from their production,

```
possible, then subsequent minimization of pollution to the extent that the
intent and objectives of this safeguard are satisfied.
```
(^30) Similar considerations will apply to certain World Health Organisation
(WHO) classes of pesticides.
(^31) Transboundary movement of hazardous materials should be consistent
with national, regional and international law, including the Basel
Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous
Wastes and their Disposal, available at [http://www.basel.int,](http://www.basel.int,) and the London
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes
and Other Matter, available at [http://www.imo.org.](http://www.imo.org.) For further guidance, the
Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management (SAICM) is a
policy framework to foster the sound management of chemicals, available
at [http://www.saicm.org/.](http://www.saicm.org/.)


### transportation, handling, storage, and use. Where avoidance is not possible,

### the health risks, including potential differentiated effects on men, women,

### and children, of the potential use of hazardous materials shall be addressed

### appropriately. Project shall consider the special vulnerabilities faced by

### workers as well as low-income communities, peoples with disabilities,

### indigenous peoples and minorities to hazardous materials.

### P.9.5.4 | Projects shall consider the use of less hazardous substitutes for such

### chemicals and materials and shall avoid the manufacture, trade, and use of

### chemicals and hazardous materials subject to international bans or phase-

### outs due to their high toxicity to living organisms, environmental

### persistence, potential for bioaccumulation, or potential for depletion of the

### ozone layer^32 , unless for acceptable purposes as defined by the conventions

### or protocols e.g. the Montreal Protocol, Minamata Convention, Basel

### Convention, Rotterdam Convention, Stockholm Convention).

### P.9.5.5 | The Project shall not make use of chemicals or materials subject to

### international bans or phase-outs. For example, DDT, PCBs and other

### chemicals listed in international conventions such as the Stockholm

### Conventions on Persistent Organic Pollutants or the Montreal Protocol.

### Pesticides & Fertilisers

### The GS4GG certification requires that:

### P.9.6.1 | For activities involving pest management, the integrated pest management

### (IPM) and /or integrated vector management (IVM) approaches^33 shall be

### adopted and aim to reduce reliance on chemical pesticides. A Pest

### Management Plan shall be developed where use of a significant volume of

### pesticides is foreseen, to demonstrate how IPM/IVM is promoted to reduce

(^32) As defined by international conventions or local legislation. Where local
legislation and international conventions may diverge, the higher
standard will apply.
(^33) Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and Integrated Vector Management
(IVM) approaches entail coordinated use of pest and environmental
information along with available pest/vector control methods, including
cultural practices, biological, genetic and, as a last resort, chemical
means to prevent unacceptable levels of pest damage. If after having
considered such approaches recourse to pesticide use is deemed
necessary, adopt safe, effective and environmentally sound pest
management in accordance with the WHO/FAO International Code of
Conduct on Pesticide Management f or the safe labelling, packaging,
handling, storage, application and disposal of pesticides. Hazards of
pesticide use are to be carefully considered and the least toxic pesticides
selected that are known to be effective, have minimal effects on non-
target species and the environment, and minimise risks associated with
development of resistance in pests and vectors.


### reliance on pesticides and describe measures to minimise risks of pesticide

### use.

### P.9.6.2 | The health and environmental risks associated with pest management

### should be minimised with support, as needed, to institutional capacity

### development, to help regulate and monitor the distribution and use of

### pesticides and enhance the application of integrated pest management.

### P.9.6.3 | When Projects include pest management or the use of chemical pesticides,

### pesticides that are low in human toxicity, known to be effective against the

### target species and have minimal effects on non-target species and the

### environment shall be selected. When the project developer selects chemical

### pesticides, the selection shall be based upon requirements that the

### pesticides be packaged in safe containers, be clearly labelled for safe and

### proper use, and that the pesticides have been manufactured by an entity

### currently licensed by relevant regulatory agencies.

### P.9.6.4 | There shall be a ‘Chemical Pesticides Policy’ that is documented,

### implemented, and regularly updated. This policy shall include at a

### minimum:

### a. Provisions for safe transport, storage, handling, and application, AND

### b. Provisions for emergency situations.

### P.9.6.5 | The project developer shall not purchase, store, manufacture, trade or use

### products that fall in Classes IA (extremely hazardous) and IB (highly

### hazardous) of the World Health Organization Recommended Classification of

### Pesticides by Hazard. T he project developer shall not purchase, store, use,

### manufacture, or trade in Class II (moderately hazardous) pesticides, unless

### the project has appropriate controls on manufacture, procurement, or

### distribution and/or use of these chemicals. These chemicals shall not be

### accessible to personnel without proper training, equipment, and facilities to

### handle, store, apply, and dispose off these products properly.

### P.9.6.6 | Fertilisers^34 shall be avoided, or fertiliser use shall be minimised to ensure

### the effective and efficient use of fertilisers^35 to meet agricultural demands

### while minimising nutrient losses to the environment. The project developer

### should put measures in place to preserve ecosystem services and minimise

### environmental impacts from the use of fertilisers including soil and water

(^34) The term ‘fertiliser’ refers to a chemical or natural substance or
material that is used to provide nutrients to plants, usually via application
to the soil, but also to foliage or through water in rice systems, fertigation
or hydroponics or aquaculture operations. Thus, multiple nutrient types
and sources are considered herein include: chemical and mineral
fertilisers; organic fertilisers such as livestock manures and composts;
and sources of recycled nutrients such as wastewater, sewage sludge,
digestates and other processed wastes.
(^35) Refer to The stakeholders directly or indirectly involved with fertilisers


### pollution, ammonia volatilisation, greenhouse gas emissions and other

### nutrient loss mechanisms. In this context, the management practices that

### produce the most positive overall effect should be adopted in accordance

### with the International Code of Conduct on Sustainable Use and Management

### of Fertilisers ( FAO, 2019).

### Harvesting of forests

### The GS4GG certification requires that:

### P.9.7.1 | The Project shall:

### a. Enhance the sustainable management of forests, including the

### application of independent, credible certification for commercial,

### industrial-scale timber harvesting, AND

### b. Maintain or enhance biodiversity and ecosystem functionality in areas

### where improved forest management is undertaken. And/or

### c. Ens ure that plantations are environmentally appropriate, socially

### beneficial, and economically viable, and utilise native species

### wherever feasible.

### P.9.7.2 | The project applying Land Use & Forest Activity r equirements shall also

### comply with additional safeguarding requirements, as applicable.

### Food s ecurity

### The GS4GG certification requires that:

### P.9.8.1 | The Activity shall not negatively influence access to and availability of food

### for people affected.

### Animal welfare

### The GS4GG certification requires that:

### P.9.9.1 | The welfare of animals shall be ensured by:

### a. Provision of sufficient access to drinking water and adequate food,

### and

### b. Access to daylight, and

### c. Providing appropriate environment including shelter and a

### comfortable resting area, and

### d. Providing a humane treatment during handling and slaughter or

### killing, and

### e. No hindrance in their sensory perception and performing their basic

### needs, and

### f. The prohibition of cattle trainers, and

### g. Management policies and staff training to prevent mistreatment

### (evidence of animal mistreatment shall be treated as an immediate

### non-conformity).

### P.9.9.2 | Excessive or inadequate use of veterinary medicines shall be avoided. Thus,

### all medications shall be:


### a. Administered strictly according to label and package instructions, OR

### b. According to a trained veterinarian.

### P.9.9.3 | Injured or sick animals shall be treated and isolated, if necessary, for

### recovery. Control measures shall be put in place to ensure the transfer of

### disease (especially of zoonotic nature) is minimised.

### P.9.9.4 | Synthetic growth promoters including hormones shall not be administered.

### P.9.9.5 | Animals shall be handled using low-stress methods, equipment, and

### facilities that facilitate calm animal movement.

### P.9.9.6 | Animals shall be exposed to the least stress possible during transportation

### and slaughtering.

### P.9.9.7 | Appropriate space per animal and stocking rates per land unit should be set

### according to their developmental and physical needs.

### P.9.9.8 | The project that involves aquatic animals, special attention shall be paid to

### their specific needs in addition to above specifically regarding:

### a. Flow, quantity, and quality of water supply.

### b. Quantities of feed and required nutritional composition for the farmed

### species and for their physiological state, especially the stage of

### growth.

### c. Adequate oxygen supply.

### d. Required temperature.

### P.9.9.9 | Activity that involves primary production^36 of living natural resources e.g.,

### animal husbandry, aquaculture and fisheries, shall implement sustainable

### management practices^37 through the application of industry-specific good

### management practices and available technologies. The project shall

### a. Where primary production practices are codified in globally,

### regionally, or nationally recognised standards, the project shall

### implement sustainable management practices to one or more

(^36) Primary production is defined for the purpose of requirement as being
the cultivation of animals for human or animal consumption and use, both
in the wild or in a cultivated situation. It includes animal husbandry,
including livestock; and wild and capture fisheries including all types of
marine and freshwater organisms, both vertebrate and invertebrate.
(^37) Sustainable management practices means that the resources are
managed in a sustainable manner i.e., that animal husbandry and
aquacultural practices do not degrade the surrounding environment.
Sustainable management also ensures that people who are dependent on
these resources are properly consulted, enabled to participate in
development, and share equitably in the benefits of that development.


### relevant and credible standards^38 39 as demonstrated by independent

### verification or certification.

### b. Where relevant and credible standard(s) exist, but the project has

### not yet obtained independent verification or certification to such

### standard(s)^40 , the project developer shall engage an Expert

(^38) Credible globally, regionally, or nationally recognised standards for sustainable management
of living natural resources are those which
− are objective and achievable.
− are founded on a multi-stakeholder consultative process.
− encourage stepwise and continual improvements; and
− provide for independent verification or certification through appropriate
accredited bodies for such standards.
Gold Standard does not endorse any particular standard as meeting these requirements, since
standards can change in both content and application on the ground over time. Standards are
considered for application on a case-by -case basis, making a determination of whether the
standard and its external verification or certification system are generally consistent with the
above requirements. In general, standards that conform to the ISEAL Code of Good Practice
for Setting Social and Environmental Standards w ill be consistent with the above
requirements. With regards to eligibility of a given standard to ensure compliance with above
requirements, the project developer may confirm with Gold Standard.
(^39) IFC’s EHS Guidelines and Good Practice Notes, for example _Good Practice Note: Improving
Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations_ a nd related publications are a useful initial source of
references for project developers. Such industry-specific guidance is very dynamic and new
materials are being published regularly. A diligent internet search shall reveal a range of useful
and up-to-date sources.
(^40) A credible certification system would be one which is independent, cost-effective, based on
objective and measurable performance standards and developed through consultation with
relevant stakeholders, such as local people and communities, indigenous peoples, and civil


### Stakeholder to conduct a pre-assessment or gap analysis of its

### conformity to the applicable standard(s) and prepare an action plan

### with an appropriate timeline to achieve such verification or

### certification. The project developer shall submit the gap analysis with

### action plan before project submission for design review and achieve

### certification before the project submission for the first performance

### review under GS4GG.

### c. In the absence of a relevant and credible global, regional, or national

### standard for the particular living natural resource in the country

### concerned, the project shall follow good international industry

### operating principles, management practices, and technologies.

### P.9.9.10 | The animal welfare standards are based firmly on scientific knowledge and

### practical experience a nd the compliance with paras above in the same

### section (P9.9), above m ay require changes to husbandry practices. The

### project developer shall take into account the animal welfare-related cultural

### practices of certain individuals and groups.^41

### High conservation value^42 (HCV) areas and critical habitats

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

```
society organisations representing consumer, producer, and conservation
interests. Such a system has fair, transparent and independent decision-
making procedures that avoid conflict of interest.
```
(^41) Such practices should be accommodated during the implementation of
animal welfare standards and balanced with a realistic assessment of
market requirements and social expectations. Changes to husbandry
practices need to consider local communities’ knowledge, experience, and
beliefs, as well as the demands of the international food supply chain.
(^42) An HCV is a biological, ecological, social, or cultural value of
outstanding significance or critical importance. High Conservation Value
areas are critical areas in a landscape which need to be appropriately
managed in order to maintain or enhance High Conservation Values
(HCVs). The HCV areas includes both forest and non-forest ecosystems.
Refer to Common Guidance for the identification of - HIGH
CONSERVATION VALUES f o r further guidance on the interpretation of the
HCV definitions and their identification in practice, to achieve
standardisation in use of the HCV approach.
Refer to Common Guidance for the Management and Monitoring of - HIGH
CONSERVATION VALUES g uidance on management and monitoring of
HCVs, to be used as a companion to the identification guidance.


### P.9.10.1 | No Project that potentially impacts identified habitats^43 such as HCV areas

### and or Critical habitats shall be implemented unless all of the following are

### demonstrated:

### a. The risk of the Project negatively impacting the catchment and risks

### impacting project success shall be assessed and addressed to ensure

### its ongoing, long-term viability and impact on surrounding HCV and

### ecological assets.

### b. No measurable adverse impacts on the criteria or biodiversity values

### for which the critical habitat was designated, and on the ecological

### processes supporting those biodiversity values.

### c. A robust, appropriately designed, and long-term Habitats and

### Biodiversity Action Plan is in place to achieve net gains of those

### biodiversity values for which the critical habitat was designated.

### P.9.10.2 | Within the Project, the area that is managed by the project developer and

### the area of impact downstream, the following shall be identified and

### protected/enhanced. In the case of downstream impacts, the Project shall

### ensure mitigation is in place within the Project Boundary such that the

### Project shall not adversely affect these areas:

### a. Existing patches of native tree species, and

### b. Single solitary stems of native tree species, and

### c. All freshwater resources including rivers, lakes, swamps, ephemeral

### water bodies and wells, and

### d. Habitats of rare, threatened, and endangered species, and

### e. Areas relevant for habitat connectivity.

### P.9.10.3 | If the Project is located in such habitats; the project developer shall:

### a. Minimise unwarranted conversion or degradation of the habitat.

### b. Identify opportunities to enhance the habitat as part of the Project.

### P.9.10.4 | For Activities applying the Land Use & Forest Activity Requirements

### Projects, a minimum 10% of the Project area shall be identified and

### managed to protect or enhance the biological diversity of native ecosystems

### following HCV approach^44. This area:

### a. shall be located within the project region and managed by the project

### developer.

(^43) Habitat is defined as a terrestrial, freshwater, or marine geographical
unit or airway that supports assemblages of living organisms and their
interactions with the non-living environment.
(^44) Refer to Common Guidance for the identification of high conservation
values f or further guidance on the interpretation of the HCV definitions
and their identification in practice, to achieve standardisation in use of the
HCV approach. Refer to Common Guidance for the Management and Monitoring
of high conservation values guidance on management and monitoring of
HCVs, to be used as a companion to the identification guidance.


### b. may also include the areas of the requirement (for example, buffer

### zones for water bodies in the case of Land Use & Forests).

### P.9.10.5 | The opinions and recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder shall be

### sought and demonstrated as being included in the Project design. The

### project can use mapping tools such as LEFT, IUCN Red List, IBAT or other

### appropriate nationally recognised tools may be used or visual inspection.

### The recommended methods include online tools, visual inspection,

### engineering, or physical assessment, use historical data and verbal or

### written surveys with local residents.

### Endangered species

### The GS4GG Certification requires that:

### P.9.11.1 | Under no circumstances shall the Project lead to the reduction or negative

### impact of any recognised Endangered, Vulnerable or Critically Endangered

### species^45.

### P.9.11.2 | Habitats of endangered species shall be specifically identified and managed

### to protect or enhance them.

### P.9.11.3 | The opinions and recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder shall be

### sought and demonstrated as being considered and incorporated into the

### project design.

### Invasive alien species^46

### The GS4GG certification requires that:

(^45) All endangered and critically endangered species as defined by the
IUCN Red List; https://www.iucnredlist.org/
The determination of critical habitat based on other listings is as follows:
If the species is listed nationally / regionally as critically endangered or
endangered, in countries that have adhered to IUCN guidance, the critical
habitat determination will be made on a project-by -project basis in
consultation with competent professionals; and in instances where
nationally or regionally listed species’ categorisations do not correspond
well to those of the IUCN (e.g., some countries more generally list species
as “protected” or “restricted”), an assessment will be conducted to
determine the rationale and purpose of the listing. In this case, the
critical habitat determination will be based on such an assessment.
(^46) Invasive alien species are nonnative species that may become invasive
or spread rapidly by outcompeting other native plants and animals when
they are introduced into a new habitat that lacks controlling factors as
determined by natural evolution. Invasive alien species are recognised to
be a major global threat to biodiversity and ecosystem services.


### P.9.12.1 | The project under no circumstances shall introduce any alien species (not

### currently established in the country or region of the project) into new

### environments. Notwithstanding the above, the project shall not deliberately

### introduce any alien species with a high risk of invasive behaviour regardless

### of whether such introductions are permitted under the existing regulatory

### framework. The project shall implement measures to avoid the potential for

### accidental or unintended introductions including the transportation of

### substrates and vectors (such as soil, ballast, and plant materials) that may

### harbour alien species.

### P.9.12.2 | Where alien species are already established in the country or region of the

### proposed project, the project developer shall exercise diligence in not

### spreading them into areas in which they have not already been established.

### As practicable, the project developer should take measures to eradicate

### such species from the natural habitats over which they have management

### control.

### ----


### CORE DOCUMENT

## Annex 1: Safeguarding principles assessment questions ____________________________

### The Project shall provide responses to assessment questions, including justifications

### for responses following the below guidance:

### Response Meaning Guidance

### “Yes”

### Meaning that the risk or expected

### issue identified in the assessment

### question is existing in the project

### and context taking into account

### the scope and scale of the project.

### The requirements apply and

### adherence shall be demonstrated.

### All information must be included

### in the Monitoring & Reporting Plan

### and future Monitoring Reports.

### “Potentially”

### Meaning that the risk or expected

### issue may exist at some point in

### the Project’s cycle but is not

### necessarily present now and/or

### may never arise.

### The requirements apply but the

### Project may justify with evidence

### why these requirements do not

### need to be demonstrated as being

### met. The project shall update

### information on any assessment

### questions answered ‘Potentially’

### for each monitoring report.

### “No”

### Meaning that the risk or expected

### issue is not present in the Project.

### Justification shall be provided to

### support this conclusion, with

### evidence provided where required.

### “NA”

### Meaning the question is not

### relevant to the project and its

### potential impact.

### No action is needed.

### The Safeguarding Principles Assessment shall include a description with justifications

### on how a project met or will meet (i.e., monitor if needed) these requirements.

### The Requirements shall guide mitigation proposal where a risk is identified, i.e., the

### mitigation proposal to address identified risk shall be designed with the intention of

### achieving the stated requirements.

### The scope of each requirement (for example, its application during implementation or

### to upstream or downstream issues) is defined within the relevant section.


### Assessment questions

### The table below presents a non-exhaustive list of questions. New questions may be

### added depending on the specific context of any given project. Some additional

### considerations could include the project's timeline, budget, and desired outcomes. It

### may also be necessary to factor in the stakeholders involved, their expectations, and

### any potential challenges or constraints that may arise. Furthermore, it is important to

### regularly review and update the list of questions throughout the project's lifecycle to

### ensure that all relevant risks are being taken into account and addressed.

### SOCIAL SAFEGUARDING PRINCIPLES

```
Reference
requirement
Question Response
```
### P.1 |HUMAN RIGHTS

P.1.1.1 | (^) Does the project developer, its representatives and the
Project disrespect internationally proclaimed human rights?

### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

```
P.1.1.1 | Is the project involved or complicit in violence or human
rights abuses of any kind as defined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights?
```
### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

```
P.1.1.2 | Have local communities or individuals raised human rights
concerns regarding the project (e.g., during the stakeholder
engagement process, grievance processes, public
statements)?
```
#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.1.1.3 | (^) Is there a risk that rights-holders (e.g., Project-affected
stakeholders) do not have the capacity to claim their rights?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.1.1.3 | (^) Does this project undermine national or regional measures
for the realisation of the right to development?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

```
If the answer to any of the questions above is "yes," please explain the reason and how the
project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.
Please add text here...
Would the project potentially involve or lead to:
```
P.1.1.1 | (^) adverse impacts on enjoyment of the human rights (civil,
political, economic, social or cultural) of the affected
population and particularly of marginalised groups?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

```
P.1.1.2 | inequitable or discriminatory impacts on affected
populations, particularly people living in poverty or
marginalised or excluded individuals or groups, including
persons with disabilities?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.1.1.3 | (^) restrictions in availability, quality of and/or access to
resources or basic services, in particular to marginalised
individuals or groups, including persons with disabilities?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

#### P.1.1.3 |

```
exacerbation of conflicts among and/or the risk of violence
to project-affected communities and individuals?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

```
Briefly describe below how the project incorporates a human rights-based approach.
```
### For example, by describing how the project design:


- is informed by human rights analysis, including from UN human rights mechanisms
    (human rights treaty bodies, universal periodic review, special procedures)
- includes measures to assist the government to realise (respect, protect and fulfil)
    human rights under international law and to implement human rights-related
    standards in national law (whichever is higher)
- enhances the availability, accessibility and quality of benefits and services for
    potentially marginalised individuals and groups, and to increase their inclusion in
    decision-making processes that may impact them (consistent with the non-
    discrimination and equality human rights principle)
- provides reasonable accommodations to strengthen inclusivity and accessibility of
    project benefits and services to persons with disabilities.

_Please add text here...._

### P.2 |GENDER EQUALITY AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT

### P.2.1.1 | Have women’s groups/leaders raised gender equality

```
concerns regarding the project, (e.g., during the
stakeholder engagement process, grievance processes,
```
### public statements)?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.2.1.2 | (^) Does the project undermine the principles of non-
discrimination, equal treatment, and equal pay for equal
work?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

### P.2.1.2 | Does the project prevent men and women from having

```
equal opportunities to participate in identified tasks and
activities, whether through paid work, volunteer work, or
community contributions, as appropriate?
```
#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

### P.2.1.2 | Does the project limit the participation of women or men

```
based on pregnancy, maternity/paternity leave, or marital
status?
```
#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.2.1.2 | Is information about project objectives being communicated
in a way that is inappropriate for the local context and not
tailored to the methods of understanding of both women
and men, which could hinder their participation?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.2.1.3 | Has the project assessed gender risks without referencing
the country's gender strategy or equivalent national
commitment?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.2.1.4 | Has expert stakeholder(s) been involved, and has their
input been requested for the project design on gender
equality and women's empowerment?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer to any of the questions above is "yes," please explain the reason and how the
project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

_Please add text here...._

Would the project potentially involve or lead to: (^)

### P.2.1.1 | adverse impacts on gender equality and/or the situation of

```
women and girls?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.2.1.1 | exacerbation of risks of gender-based violence? For
example, through the influx of workers to a community,

#### ☐ YES


```
changes in community and household power dynamics,
increased exposure to unsafe public places and/or
transport, etc.
```
### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.2.1.2 | (^) reproducing discriminations against women based on
gender, especially regarding participation in design and
implementation or access to opportunities and benefits?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

### P.2.1.2 | limitations on women’s ability to use, develop and protect

```
natural resources, taking into account different roles and
positions of women and men in accessing environmental
goods and services?
For example, activities that could lead to natural resources
degradation or depletion in communities who depend on
these resources for their livelihoods and well-being.
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

Briefly describe below how the project is addressing any identified risk to gender equality
and women’s empowerment.

_Please add text here...._

### P.3 |COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY

P.3.1.1 | (^) Does the project involve potential risks to the health and

### safety of affected communities during its life cycle?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

P.3.1.2 | (^) Does the project involve any potential risks to the workers'
safety and health?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

If the answer to any of the questions above is "yes," please explain the reason and how the

### project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### Would the project potentially involve or lead to:

### P.3.1.1 | construction and/or infrastructure development (e.g.,

```
roads, buildings, dams)?
```
#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

### P.3.1.2 | air pollution, noise, vibration, traffic, injuries, physical

```
hazards, poor surface water quality due to runoff, erosion,
sanitation?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

### P.3.1.2 | harm or losses due to failure of structural elements of the

```
project (e.g., collapse of buildings or infrastructure)?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

### P.3.1.2 | risks of water-borne or other vector-borne diseases (e.g.,

```
temporary breeding habitats), communicable and
noncommunicable diseases, nutritional disorders, mental
health?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

### P.3.1.2 | transport, storage, and use and/or disposal of hazardous or

```
dangerous materials (e.g., explosives, fuel and other
chemicals during construction and operation)?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

### P.3.1.2 | adverse impacts on ecosystems and ecosystem services

```
relevant to communities’ health (e.g., food, surface water
purification, natural buffers from flooding)?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO


Briefly describe below how the project is addressing any identified risk related to community
health and safety.

### Please add text here....

### P.4 |CULTURAL HERITAGE, INDIGENOUS PEOPLE, DISPLACEMENT AND

### RESETTLEMENT

### P.4.1 |Sites of cultural and historical heritage

P.4.1.1 | (^) Does the project involve altering, damaging, or removing

### sites, objects, or structures of significant cultural heritage?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

If the answer to question above is "yes," please explain the reason and how the project will
ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

_Please add text here...._

### Would the project potentially involve or lead to:

P.4.1.1 | activities adjacent to or within a cultural heritage site? ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.4.1.1 | significant excavations, demolitions, movement of earth,
flooding or other environmental changes?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.4.1.1 | alterations to landscapes and natural features with cultural
significance?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

### P.4.1.1 | adverse impacts to sites, structures, or objects with

```
historical, cultural, artistic, traditional or religious values or
intangible forms of culture (e.g., knowledge, innovations,
practices)? (Note: projects intended to protect and
conserve Cultural Heritage may also have inadvertent
adverse impacts)
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

### P.4.1.2 | utilisation of tangible and/or intangible forms (e.g.,

```
practices, traditional knowledge) of Cultural Heritage
for commercial or other purposes?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.4.1.2 | If answer to question above is “YES” or “POTENTIALLY” -
are the communities made aware of their right under the
law, scope and nature of proposed development and its
potential consequences?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.1.3 | If answer to question above is “YES” - does the project
provide equitable sharing of benefits from
commercialisation of such knowledge, innovation, or
practice, consistent with their customs and traditions?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.1.4 | If answer to question above is “YES” - are opinions and
recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder(s) not sought
and demonstrated as being included in the project design?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.1.4 | If answer to question above is “YES”, has project design
been changed, modified, updated considering opinions and
recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA


If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

P.4.2 | _Forced eviction and displacement_

P.4.2.1 | (^) Does the project involve any risks related to involuntary
relocation of people?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer to question above is "yes," please explain the reason and how the project will
ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### Would the project potentially involve or lead to:

P.4.2.1 | risk of forced evictions or involuntary relocation of people? (^) ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.4.2.2 | temporary or permanent and full or partial physical
displacement (including people without legally recognisable
claims to land)?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.4.2.2 | economic displacement (e.g., loss of assets or access to
resources due to land acquisition or access restrictions –
even in the absence of physical relocation)?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.4.2.2 | (^) If answer to question above is “YES” or “POTENTIALLY”,

- has the project developed Resettlement Action Plan
    or Livelihood Action Plan in consultation and
    agreement with affected individual, group or
    community?
- has the project integrated Resettlement Action Plan
    or Livelihood Action Plan into the Project design?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.2.3 | If answer to question above is “YES” - are opinions and
recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder(s) not sought
and demonstrated as being included in the project design?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.2.3 | If answer to question above is “YES”, have project design
been changed, modified, updated considering opinions and
recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

_Please add text here...._

### P.4.3 |LAND TENURE AND OTHER RIGHTS

### P.4.3.1 | Does the project involve any risks related to identifying and

```
managing legitimate tenure rights that may be affected by
the project?
```
#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer to question above is "yes," please explain the reason and how the project will

### ensure compliance with applicable requirements.


### Please add text here....

Would the project potentially involve or lead to:

P.4.3.1 | (^) impacts on or changes to land tenure arrangements and/or
community-based property rights/customary rights to land,
territories and/or resources?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.4.3.1 | uncertainties with regards to land tenure, access rights,
usage rights or land ownership?
Examples include, but are not limited to water access
rights, community-based property rights and customary
rights.

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.4.3.2 | Changes in legal arrangements, if yes, are the changes
done in line with relevant laws and regulations?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.3.2 | Changes in legal arrangements, if yes, are these changes
agree with free, prior and informed consent of the involved
stakeholders?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.3.3 | Does some other entity (other than the project developer)
hold uncontested land title for the entire Project Boundary?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.3.4 | Are opinions and recommendations of an Expert
Stakeholder(s) not sought and demonstrated as being
included in the project design?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.3.4 | If answer to question above is “YES”, have project design
been changed, modified, updated considering opinions and
recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.3.5 | Have project developer in consultation with stakeholders
established a functioning mechanism to receive, process,
resolve, communicate and record grievances?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### P.4.4 |INDIGENOUS PEOPLES

### P.4.4.1 | Does the project involve Indigenous People within the

```
Project area of influence who may be affected directly or
```
### indirectly by the Project?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer to question above is "yes," please explain project situation and how the

### project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

Would the project potentially involve or lead to:

P.4.4.1 | affect areas where indigenous peoples are present
(including project area of influence)

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO


P.4.4.1 | affect areas, land and territory claimed by indigenous
peoples?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.4.4.1 | impacts (positive or negative) to the human rights, lands,
natural resources, territories, and traditional livelihoods of
indigenous peoples?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.4.4.7 | If answer to above questions is ’’YES’’ or “POTENTIALLY”,

- Is it determined that the proposed project may
    affect the rights, lands, resources, or territories of
    indigenous people?
- Has an "Indigenous People Plan" (IPP) or
    "Indigenous People Plan Framework" been
    elaborated and included in the project
    documentation?

### - Was the plan developed in accordance with the effective

### and meaningful participation of indigenous peoples and

### in accordance with UNDP Guidelines?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.4.3 | risk of forcibly removing indigenous people from their lands
and territories?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.4.4.4 | utilisation and/or commercial development of natural
resources on lands and territories claimed by indigenous
peoples?

```
Consider, and where appropriate ensure, consistency with
the answers under Principle 4.1 above
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

#### P.4.4.5 |

### P.4.4.6 |

```
If answer to question above is “YES” or “POTENTIALLY”
```
- Did the project obtain free, prior and informed
    consent from indigenous people before taking their
    cultural, intellectual, religious, and/or spiritual
    property?
- Does the project ensure that the indigenous people
    receive an equitable sharing of benefits resulting
    from the use of their traditional knowledge and
    practices??
- Does the project ensure that the sharing of benefits
    resulting from the use of indigenous peoples'
    traditional knowledge and practices is culturally
    appropriate and inclusive?

### - Does the project ensure that the provision of

```
equitable sharing of benefits does not impede land
rights or equal access to basic services including
health services, clean water, energy, education, safe
```
### and decent working conditions, and housing?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.4.8 | Does the project lack appropriate feedback and grievance
channels for Indigenous Peoples and their representatives?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA


P.4.4.8 | Has a grievance mechanism not been established at the
beginning of programme or project implementation with
due consideration given to customary dispute settlement
mechanisms among the Indigenous Peoples concerned and
will it remain operational throughout the project cycle?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.4.9 | (^) Are opinions and recommendations of an Expert
Stakeholder(s) not sought and demonstrated as being
included in the project design?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.4.4.9 | (^) If answer to question above is “YES”, have project design
been changed, modified, updated considering opinions and
recommendations of an Expert Stakeholder?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### P.5 |CORRUPTION

P.5.1.1 | (^) Does the project involve, or is it complicit in, contributing to

### or reinforcing corruption or corrupt projects?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.5.1.1 | (^) Does the project have a risk of encouraging bribery,
kickbacks, or other unethical behavior?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer to any of the questions above is "yes," please explain project situation and
how the project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### ECONOMIC SAFEGUARDING PRINCIPLES

### P.6 |ECONOMIC IMPACTS

### P.6.1 |LABOUR RIGHTS AND WORKING CONDITIONS

P.6.1.1 | (^) Does the project involve, facilitate, or condone forced labor,
or pose a potential risk of forced labor?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

P.6.1.1 | (^) Does the project violate any labor or health and safety
laws, international obligations, or ILO conventions?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

P.6.1.2 | (^) Does the project violate the principles of equal opportunity
and fair treatment in its employment decisions?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### P.6.1.3 |

```
Does the project violate national laws, if available regarding
non-discrimination in employment?
```
#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### P.6.1.4 |

### P.6.1.5 |

Does the project allow child labor? (^) ☐ YES
☐ NO
P.6.1.7 |

### P.6.1.8 |

```
Does the project have insufficient processes and measures
in place to ensure the safety and health of project workers?
```
#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.9 | Does the project have insufficient measures to safeguard
and support vulnerable project workers, such as women,
people with disabilities, migrant workers, and young
workers, and to prevent any kind of harassment, abuse,

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO


(^47) Basic services requirements refer to minimum space, supply of water,
adequate sewage and garbage disposal system, appropriate protection
against heat, cold, damp, noise, fire, and disease-carrying animals,
adequate sanitary and washing facilities, ventilation, cooking and storage
facilities and natural and artificial lighting, and in some cases basic
medical services.
bullying, or exploitation, including gender-based violence
(GBV)?
P.6.1.10 | (^) Does the project have no grievance mechanism available
for workers to voice workplace concerns? Is information
about this mechanism not provided to workers at the time
of recruitment, or is it not easily accessible?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer to any of the questions above is "yes," please explain project situation and
how the project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

Would the project potentially involve or lead to:

### ( NOTE: APPLIES TO BOTH PROJECT AND CONTRACTOR WORKERS)

P.6.1.1 | use of forced labour? (^) ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.1 | working conditions that do not meet national labour laws
and international commitments?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.1 | working conditions that may deny freedom of association
and collective bargaining?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

### ☐ NO

P.6.1.1 | absence of documented working agreements with all

### individual workers

```
if such agreements do not exist, or do not address working
conditions and terms of employment, the project developer
shall provide reasonable working conditions and terms of
```
### employment.

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.1 | use of migrant workers?

```
if engaged, the developer shall ensure that they are
engaged substantially equivalent terms and conditions to
non-migrant workers carrying out similar work.
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

### ☐ NO

P.6.1.1 | having no arrangements for basic services^47 for workers?

```
the project developer shall put in place and implement
policies on the quality and management of the
accommodation and provision of basic services in a manner
consistent with the principles of non-discrimination and
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO


```
equal opportunity. Workers’ accommodation arrangements
should not restrict workers’ freedom of movement or of
```
### association

P.6.1.2 | any form of discrimination or harassment based on factors
unrelated to job requirements, such as gender, race,
nationality, ethnicity, social or indigenous origin, religion or
belief, disability, age, or sexual orientation?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.2 | any form of discrimination in any aspect of employment,
such as recruitment, compensation, working conditions,
training, job assignment, promotion, termination, or
discipline?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.2 | harassment, intimidation, and/or exploitation, especially in

### regard to women?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.3 | discriminatory working conditions and/or lack of equal
opportunity where national law provides provision to
address non-discrimination in employment?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.4 | use of child labour? (including third-party engaged workers) (^) ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

### ☐ NO

P.6.1.4 | inadequate and verifiable mechanisms for age verification? (^) ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

P.6.1.7 | no processes and measures in place for the safety and
health of project workers?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.7 | No provision of safety and health training provisions,
including on the proper use and maintenance of personal
protective equipment conducted by competent persons and
the maintenance of training records?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.7 | No provision to record and document accidents, diseases,
incidents, and any resulting injuries, illnesses, or deaths?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.8 | occupational health and safety risks due to physical,
chemical, biological and psychosocial hazards (including
violence and harassment) throughout the project life-cycle?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.9 | No measures to protect vulnerable project workers from
harassment, exploitation, and gender-based violence
(GBV)? T his includes women, people with disabilities,
migrant workers, and young workers.

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.10 | (^) No grievance mechanism available for workers to voice
workplace concerns.

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.6.1.11 | (^) No measures for due diligence and the establishment of
policies and procedures to manage and monitor the
performance of third-party employees in the project?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### P.6.2 |NEGATIVE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES


P.6.2.1 | Is there a risk of project failure during implementation or
after project certification due to a lack of financial

### resources?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

P.6.2.2 | (^) Does the project have potential negative impacts or pose a
risk to the local economy?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.6.2.2 | Are there any potential risks or negative impacts this
project may have on vulnerable or marginalised social

### groups, despite the benefits it may bring?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer to any of the questions above is "yes," please explain project situation and

### how the project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

_Please add text here..._

### Would the project involve or lead to:

P.6.2.2 | economic impacts (negative/detrimental) to the local
economy?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

### ☐ NO

P.6.2.2 | negative economic consequences during and after project
implementation, e.g., for vulnerable and marginalised social
groups in targeted communities?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

### ☐ NO

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as

### necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### P.7 | CLIMATE AND ENERGY

### P.7.1 |GHG EMISSIONS

P.7.1.1 | (^) Does the project have a risk of increasing greenhouse gas

### emissions over the Baseline Scenario?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

If the answer to question above is "yes," please explain project situation and how the
project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### Would the project involve or lead to:

#### P.7.1.1 |

```
increase greenhouse gas emissions over the Baseline
Scenario?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

### ☐ NO

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to the above question, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as

### necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### P.7.2 |ENERGY SUPPLY

### P.7.2.1 | Does the project pose a risk to the availability and reliability

### of energy supply to other users?

#### ☐ YES


#### ☐ NO

If the answer to question above is "yes," please explain project situation and how the

### project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

Would the project involve or lead to:

P.7.2.1 | negative impact on the availability and reliability of energy
supply to other users?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to the above question, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### P.8 |WATER

### P.8.1 |IMPACT ON NATURAL WATER PATTERNS/FLOWS

P.8.1.1 | (^) Does the project increase water usage to a level that will

### not allow for the maintenance of environmental flows?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

### P.8.1.1 | Does the project result in the discharge of wastewater that

```
does not meet the required standard for beneficial reuse
and could therefore negatively impact the environmental
flow?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

P.8.1.1 | (^) Does the project have the potential risk to exceed the rate
of recharge for the groundwater source?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

### P.8.1.1 | Does the project involve any processes or activities that

```
could contaminate the groundwater and render it unsuitable
for use?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

If the answer to any of the questions above is "yes," please explain project situation and

### how the project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### Would the project involve or lead to:

P.8.1.1 | affect the natural or pre-existing pattern of watercourses,
groundwater and/or the watershed(s) such as high seasonal
flow variability, flooding potential, lack of aquatic
connectivity or water scarcity?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

#### P.8.1.1 |

```
Wastewater discharge of quality that does not meet the
required standard for beneficial reuse?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.8.1.1 | (^) significant extraction, diversion of ground water? For
example, construction of dams, reservoirs, river basin
developments, groundwater extraction

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO


P.8.1.2 | (^) Are opinions and recommendations of an Expert
Stakeholder(s) not sought and demonstrated as being
included in the project design?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### P.8.2 |EROSION AND/OR WATER BODY INSTABILITY

P.8.2.1 | (^) Does the project have a risk of negatively impacting the

### catchment and has it been assessed and addressed?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer to question above is "yes," please explain project situation and how the
project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

Would the project involve or lead to:

P.8.2.2 |

### -

#### P.8.2.5 |

```
negatively impact on the catchment area?
```
```
If yes, Erosion prevention measures, including soil and
slope protection measures, must be implemented before
project commencement. These measures should involve
natural terracing, infiltration strips, permanent ground
cover, hedge and tree rows, and effective slope length
assessment. Regular reassessment of these measures is
```
### necessary.

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.8.2.6 | (^) Are opinions and recommendations of an Expert
Stakeholder(s) not sought and demonstrated as being
included in the project design?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### P.9 |ENVIRONMENT, ECOLOGY AND LAND USE

### P.9.1 |LANDSCAPE MODIFICATION AND SOIL

#### P.9.1.1 |

### -

### P.9.1.3 |

```
Is there any risk of soil resource degradation or loss of
ecosystem services provided by soils in the project?
```
```
If yes, the project shall maintain healthy soils by minimising
negative impacts on soil health, productivity, structure, and
water retention. Steps to minimise soil degradation include
crop rotation, composting, using N-fixing plants, and
reducing tillage and ecologically harmful substances.
```
#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer to question above is "yes," please explain project situation and how the
project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.


### Please add text here....

### Would the project involve or lead to:

P.9.1.4 | production, harvesting, and/or management of living
natural resources by small-scale landholders and/or local
communities?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.9.1.4 | if answer to above question “yes” or “potentially”, does
project adopt appropriate and culturally sensitive
sustainable resource management practices?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### P.9.2 |VULNERABILITY TO NATURAL DISASTER

### P.9.2.1 | Does the project have any risks associated with natural or

```
man-made hazards that could result from land use changes
```
### due to the project?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

If the answer to question above is "yes," please explain project situation and how the
project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

Would the project involve or lead to:

P.9.2.2 |
any potential risks that require emergency preparedness
and response planning?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.9.2.2 | if answer to above question “yes” or “potentially”, did the
project developer disclose appropriate information about
emergency preparedness and response to affected
communities?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### P.9.3 |BIOSAFETY AND GENETIC RESOURCES

### P.9.3.1 | Does the project involve the transfer, handling, and use of

```
genetically modified organisms/living modified organisms
```
### that may result in adverse effects on biological diversity?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

If the answer to question above is "yes," please explain project situation and how the

### project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

Would the project involve or lead to:


P.9.3.1 | the transfer, handling and use of genetically modified
organisms/living modified organisms (GMOs/LMOs) that
result from modern biotechnology

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

### ☐ NO

P.9.3.1 | If answer to above question is “yes” has a risk assessment
by a competent Expert stakeholder been carried out in

### accordance with Annex iii of the Cartagena protocol on

### biosafety to the convention on biological diversity?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.9.3.2 | If answer to above question is “yes” has any risks identified
in the risk assessment?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.9.3.3 | Forestry (for example Afforestation/Reforestation) involving
GMO planting?

```
Note - Forestry projects (for example Afforestation/
Reforestation) involving GMO planting are not eligible for
Certification under Gold Standard for the Global Goals.
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

P.9.4 |RELEASE OF POLLUTANTS

### P.9.4.1 | Does the project have a risk of releasing pollutants to air,

```
water, and land in routine, non-routine, or accidental
circumstances?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

If the answer to question above is "yes," please explain project situation and how the
project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

Would the project involve or lead to:

P.9.4.1 | any potential risk of pollutant release that cannot be
avoided?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.9.4.3 | If answer to above question is “Yes” or “potentially”, has
the project identified all potential pollution sources that may
degrade the quality of soil, air, surface, and groundwater in
the project area?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.9.4.2 | If answer to above question is “Yes” or “potentially”, do the
pollution prevention and control technologies and practices
applied during the project life cycle align with national
regulations or international best practices?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.9.4.3 | If answer to above question is “Yes”, is there a monitoring
plan to ensure that mitigation measures are implemented,
and resources are protected?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.


### Please add text here....

### P.9.5 |HAZARDOUS AND NON-HAZARDOUS WASTE

P.9.5.1 | (^) Does the project involve the generation of waste materials
(both hazardous and non-hazardous)?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

P.9.5.3 | Does the project involve risk of release of hazardous
materials resulting from their production, transportation,
handling, storage, or use?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.9.5.5 | Does the project involve the use of any chemicals or
materials subject to international bans or phase-outs?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer to any of the questions above is "yes," please explain project situation and

### how the project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

Would the project involve or lead to:

P.9.5.1 | the generation and management of waste materials? (^) ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.9.5.1 | treatment, destruction, or disposal of waste material? ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.9.5.1 | If answer to above question is “Yes”, does the project
involve an environmentally friendly method that includes
appropriate control of emissions and residues resulting from
the handling and processing of waste material?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.9.5.3 | risk of release of hazardous materials resulting from their
production, transportation, handling, storage, or use?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.9.5.3 | If answer to above question is "yes”, does project has
measures in place to address health risks?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.9.5.4 | Involve manufacture, trade, and use of chemicals and
hazardous materials subject to international bans or phase-
outs due to their high toxicity to living organisms,
environmental persistence, potential for bioaccumulation, or
potential for depletion of the ozone layer

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

P.9.6 |PESTICIDES & FERTILISERS

P.9.6.1 | Does the project involve the use of chemical pesticides? (^) ☐ YES

### ☐ NO


P.9.6.5 | Does the project involve purchase, store, manufacture,
trade or use products that fall in Classes IA (extremely
hazardous) and IB (highly hazardous)

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

### P.9.6.6 | Does the project use fertilisers, and if so, are measures

```
being taken to minimise their use and nutrient losses to the
environment?
```
#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer to any of the questions above is "yes," please explain project situation and
how the project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

Would the project involve or lead to:

### P.9.6.1 | chemical pesticides use for pest management? ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.9.6.4 | If answer to question above is “yes” or “potentially”, does
project has documented Chemical Pesticides Policy in place?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.9.6.5 | purchase, store, use, manufacture, or trade in Class II
(moderately hazardous) pesticides?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.9.6.5 | If answer to question above is “yes” or “potentially”, does
project has appropriate controls on manufacture,
procurement, or distribution and/or use of these chemicals?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above questions, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

P.9.7 |HARVESTING OF FORESTS

P.9.7.1 | (^) Does the project have a risk of unsustainable forest
management, including timber harvesting?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

### P.9.7.1 | Does the project pose a risk of depleting biodiversity and

```
ecosystem functionality in areas where improved forest
```
### management is undertaken?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

### P.9.7.1 | Does the project risk not meeting requirements for

```
environment-friendly, socially beneficial, and economically
viable plantations using native species whenever possible?
```
#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer to any of the questions above is "yes," please explain project situation and
how the project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### P.9.8 |FOOD SECURITY

### P.9.8.1 | Does the project involve the risk of negatively influencing

```
access to and availability of food for people affected?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO


(^48) 'Involve' means if the project mechanism and/or impact(s) are achieved via changing animal
husbandry practices in some way.
If the answer to the question above is "yes," please explain project situation and how the

### project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

```
Would the project involve or lead to:
P.9.8.1 | modification of the quantity or nutritional quality of food
available such as through crop regime alteration or export
or economic incentives?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

```
If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to the above question, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.
```
### Please add text here....

### P.9.9 | ANIMAL WELFARE

### P.9.9.1 | Does the project involve any risks to animal welfare?

```
Animal welfare shall be ensured by providing access to
water and food, appropriate environment, humane
treatment, and staff training. Evidence of mistreatment will
be treated as an immediate non-conformity.
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

P.9.9.2 | (^) Does the project involve any potential risk of excessive or
inadequate use of veterinary medicines?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

P.9.9.4 | (^) Does the project involve the risk of administering synthetic

### growth promoters, including hormones?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

```
If the answer to any of the questions above is "yes," please explain project situation and
how the project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.
```
### Please add text here....

```
Would the project involve or lead to:
P.9.9.1 | animal husbandry or harvesting of fish populations or other
aquatic species?^48
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

```
P.9.9.1 | limiting access for animals to basic needs like drinking
water, adequate food, daylight, appropriate shelter etc.?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO


P.9.9.3 | inadequate measures to isolate sick animals and control the
spread of disease, especially zoonotic diseases?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.9.9.5 | inadequate low-stress methods, equipment, and facilities
that facilitate calm animal movement.

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.9.9.6 | inadequate measures to ensure that animals are exposed to
the least stress possible during transportation and

### slaughtering?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.9.9.7 | inappropriate spacing per animal and stocking rates per
land unit?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

P.9.9.8 | inadequate measures to address the specific needs of

### aquatic animals?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

#### P.9.9.9 |

#### P.9.9.10 |

```
primary production of living natural resources such as
animal husbandry, aquaculture, and fisheries?
```
```
If the answer is yes, implement industry-standard
sustainable management practices in line with to one or
more relevant and credible standards and utilise available
technologies.
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above question, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

### P.9.10 |HIGH CONSERVATION VALUE (HCV) AREAS AND CRITICAL HABITATS

P.9.10.1 | (^) Does the project have the risk of negatively impacting HCV
areas and/or critical habitats?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

P.9.10.2 | Does the project in the project area or area of downstream
impacts have risks to the following: native tree patches,
individual native trees, freshwater resources (including
rivers, lakes, swamps, temporary water bodies, and wells),
habitats of rare, threatened, and endangered species, and
biodiversity-enhancing areas?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ NO

If the answer to any of the questions above is "yes," please explain project situation and

### how the project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

Would the project involve or lead to:

P.9.10.1 | identified habitats as HCV areas and or Critical habitats? (^) ☐ YES
☐ POTENTIALLY
☐ NO
P.9.10.1 | If answer to above question is “yes”, does the project have
any risks that could negatively impact the catchment,

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO


```
project success, and surrounding HCV and ecological assets,
as well as any measurable adverse impacts on the criteria
or biodiversity values for which the critical habitat was
de signated, and on the ecological processes supporting that
biodiversity?
```
#### ☐ NA

P.9.10.1 | If answer to above question is “yes”, is a robust,
appropriately designed, and long-term Habitats and
Biodiversity Action Plan absent which will make the project
unable to achieve net gains of those biodiversity values for
which the critical habitat was designated?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ N/A

P.9.10.2 | Does the project area or area of downstream impacts have
native tree patches, individual native trees, freshwater
resources (including rivers, lakes, swamps, temporary
water bodies, and wells), habitats of rare, threatened, and
endangered species, and biodiversity-enhancing areas?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

P.9.10.2 | If the answer to the above question is “yes”, will the project
have any adverse effects on these areas?

#### ☐ YES

```
☐ No
☐ NA
```
P.9.10.3 | If the answer to above question is “yes”, does the project
has opportunities to minimise unwarranted conversion or
degradation of the habitat and to enhance the habitat as
part of its development?

#### ☐ YES

```
☐ No
☐ NA
```
P.9.10.4 | Is the project applying Land Use & Forest Activity
Requirements and managing a minimum 10% of the project
area to protect or enhance the biological diversity of native
ecosystems following HCV approach as per the given
requirements?

#### ☐ YES

```
☐ No
☐ NA
```
P.9.10.5 | Are opinions and recommendations of an Expert
Stakeholder(s) not sought and demonstrated as being
included in the project design?

#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above question, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

P.9.11 |ENDANGERED SPECIES

### P.9.11.1 | Does the project lead to the reduction or negative impact

```
on any recognised Endangered, Vulnerable or Critically
Endangered species?
```
#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

If the answer to question above is "yes," please explain project situation and how the

### project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.

### Please add text here....

Would the project involve or lead to:

P.9.11.2 | distortion of habitats of endangered species? ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NA

P.9.11.2 | If answer to the above question is “yes”, does the project
plan to protect and enhance them?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY


## DOCUMENT HISTORY

### Version Date Description

### 2.1 29 / 06 / 2023 Editorial edits

### 2.0 19/06/2023

### - Added checklist to annex 1 of the document

### - Made all the safeguarding principles mandatory

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ N/A

```
P.9.11.2 | Are opinions and recommendations of an Expert
Stakeholder(s) not sought and demonstrated as being
included in the project design?
```
#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

#### ☐ NA

```
If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above question, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.
```
### Please add text here....

### P.9.12 |INVASIVE ALIEN SPECIES

```
P.9.12.1 | Does project introduce any alien species (not currently
established in the country or region of the project) into new
environments?
```
#### ☐ YES

#### ☐ NO

```
If the answer to question above is "yes," please explain project situation and how the
project will ensure compliance with applicable requirements.
```
### Please add text here....

```
Would the project involve or lead to:
```
P.9.12.1 | (^) risk of introducing any alien species with a high risk of
invasive behaviour regardless of whether such introductions
are permitted under the existing regulatory framework?

#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

```
P.9.12.1 | risk of potential accidental or unintended introductions
including the transportation of substrates and vectors (such
as soil, ballast, and plant materials) that may harbour alien
species.
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

#### P.9.12.2 |

```
risk of spreading alien species into areas in which they
have not already been established?
```
#### ☐ YES

### ☐ POTENTIALLY

#### ☐ NO

```
If the answer is "yes" or "potentially" to any of the above question, please provide a brief
description of the project situation below. Also, provide justification and/or evidence as
necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements.
```
### Please add text here....


### - Added clarifications to already existing

### requirements

### - Editorial edits

### 1.2 09/10/2019 -

### 1.1 01/03/2018 -

### 1.0 01/07/2017 Initial adoption


