```
Climate Security and Sustainable Development
```
#### CORE DOCUMENT

# VALIDATION AND VERIFICATION STANDARD

Publication Date **12. 11. 2024**
Version **2.**
Next Planned Update **12. 11. 2027**

Contact Details
The Gold Standard Foundation
International Environment House 2
Chemin de Balexert 7- 9
1219 Châtelaine
Geneva, Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 788 70 80
Email: standards@goldstandard.org

# SUMMARY

The aim of the validation and verification standard is to provide a roadmap for more
efficient and consistent project assessments. This document provides the requirements
and procedures for Gold Standard Validation and Verification Bodies (GS VVBs) to
successfully carry out validation and verification for standalone project activities and
Programme of Activities (PoAs) under Gold Standard for the Global Goals (GS4GG) and
all earlier versions of Gold Standard.


## TABLE OF CONTENTS



- SUMMARY ___________________________________________________________________
- 1| OBJECTIVE, SCOPE, APPLICABILITY AND ENTRY INTO FORCE ________________________
   - 1.1 | Objectives
   - 1.2 | Scope and Applicability
   - 1.3 | Entry into force
- 2| TERMS AND DEFINITIONS ____________________________________________________
- 3| PRINCIPLES _______________________________________________________________
   - 3.1 | Independence
   - 3.2 | Ethical Conduct
   - 3.3 | Fair presentation
   - 3.4 | Due professional care
- SECTION A: GENERAL VALIDATION AND VERIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
- 4| GENERAL VALIDATION AND VERIFICATION APPROACH _____________________________
- 5| USE OF AND COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE STANDARDS __________________________
- 6| GENERAL VALIDATION REQUIREMENTS _________________________________________
   - 6.1 | Objectives of validation
   - 6.2 | Validation approach
   - 6.3 | Means of validation
   - 6.4 | Risk assessment - PoA Validation
   - 6.5 | Use of applicable document templates
   - 6.6 | Preparation and submission of VVB reports
   - 6.7 | Use of applicable Global Warming Potentials
   - 6.8 | Validation and Verification by same VVB
- SECTION B: STANDALONE PROJECT ACTIVITY
- 7| VALIDATION FOR DESIGN CERTIFICATION ______________________________________
   - 7.1 | Type and Scale
   - 7.2 | Purpose and general description of proposed project
   - 7.3 | Project boundary
   - 7.4 | Demonstration of additionality
   - 7.5 | Demonstration of prior consideration.......................................................
   - 7.6 | Start date, crediting period type and duration
   - 7.7 | Safeguarding Assessment
   - 7.8 | Gender Sensitivity Assessment
   - 7.9 | Contribution to Sustainable Development Goals
   - 7.10 | Stakeholder Consultation
   - 7.11 | Approval and Authorisation
   - 7.12 | Application of baseline and monitoring methodology(ies)
   - 7.13 | Baseline scenario
   - 7.14 | Estimation of emissions reductions or net anthropogenic removals
   - 7.15 | Monitoring Plan
   - 7.16 | Validation decision and report
- 8| VALIDATION OF DESIGN CHANGE(S) __________________________________________
   - 8.1 | Corrections
   - 8.2 | Changes to the start date of the crediting period
   - 8.3 | Update and/or permanent changes to registered monitoring plan
   - 8.4 | Changes to the project design................................................................
- 9| VERIFICATION OF IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING ___________________________
   - 9.1 | Objectives of verification
   - 9.2 | Verification approach............................................................................
   - 9.3 | Means of verification
   - 9.4 | Verification of compliance
   - 9.5 | Quality of evidence
   - 9.6 | Application of materiality
   - 9.7 | Verification report
- 10| VALIDATION FOR DESIGN CERTIFICATION RENEWAL __________________________
- VOLUNTARY PROJECT ACTIVITIES (VPAS) SECTION C: PROGRAMME OF ACTIVITIES (POAS) AND REAL CASE
- 11| VALIDATION OF THE POA _________________________________________________
   - 11.1 | Type and Scale.................................................................................
   - 11.2 | Purpose and general description of PoA
   - 11.3 | Management system
   - 11.4 | Demonstration of additionality of PoA
   - 11.5 | Start date and duration of PoA
   - 11.6 | Stakeholder consultation
   - 11.7 | Approval and Authorisation
   - 11.8 | Application of baseline and monitoring methodology(ies)
   - 11.9 | Eligibility and inclusion criteria
- 12| VALIDATION OF THE REAL CASE VPA(S) _____________________________________
   - 12.1 | Type and scale
   - 12.2 | Description of real case VPA(s)
   - 12.3 | Demonstration of additionality
   - 12.4 | Demonstration of prior consideration
   - 12.5 | Start date, duration and crediting period...............................................
   - 12.6 | Safeguarding Assessment
   - 12.7 | Gender Sensitivity Assessment
   - 12.8 | Contributions to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
   - 12.9 | Stakeholder consultation
   - 12.10 | Approval and authorisation
   - 12.11 | Application of baseline and monitoring methodology(ies)
   - 12.12 | Baseline scenario
   - 12.13 | Estimation of emission reductions or net anthropogenic removals..............
   - 12.14 | Monitoring plan
   - 12.15 | Eligibility criteria for inclusion of regular VPAs
   - 12.16 | Validation decision and report
- 13| COMPLIANCE CHECK FOR INCLUSION OF REGULAR VPAS _______________________
   - 13.1 | General Validation requirements
   - 13.2 | Type and scale
   - 13.3 | Description of the regular VPA
   - 13.4 | Demonstration of additionality
   - 13.5 | Demonstration of prior consideration
   - 13.6 | Start date, duration and crediting period...............................................
   - 13.7 | Safeguards Assessment
   - 13.8 | Gender Sensitivity Assessment
   - 13.9 | Contributions to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
   - 13.10 | Stakeholder Consultation
   - 13.11 | Approval and authorisation
   - 13.12 | Application of Baseline and Monitoring Methodology(ies)..........................
   - 13.13 | Baseline Scenario
   - 13.14 | Estimation of emissions reductions or net anthropogenic removals
   - 13.15 | Monitoring Plan
   - 13.16 | Eligibility for inclusion
   - 13.17 | Validation opinion and report
- 14| VALIDATION OF NEW REAL CASE VPA(S) ____________________________________
- 15| VALIDATION OF DESIGN CHANGES OF POA/VPA ______________________________
   - 15.1 | Corrections
   - 15.2 | Changes to the start date of the crediting period of VPA
   - 15.3 | Update and/or permanent changes to registered monitoring plan
   - 15.4 | Changes to the programme and VPA design
- 16| CHANGE OF COORDINATING AND MANAGING ENTITY __________________________
- 17| VERIFICATION OF THE POA AND VPA(S) _____________________________________
   - 17.1 | Objective of verification
   - 17.2 | Verification approach
   - 17.3 | Means of verification
   - 17.4 | Verification of compliance
   - 17.5 | Quality of evidence
   - 17.6 | Application of materiality
   - 17.7 | Verification report
- DESIGN CERTIFICATION RENEWAL OF VOLUNTARY PROJECT ACTIVITIES _______________ 18| VALIDATION FOR RENEWAL OF PROGRAMME OF ACTIVITIES PERIOD AND
   - 18.1 | Renewal of programme of activities period and real case VPA-DD
   - 18.2 | Design certification renewal of regular VPAs
- DOCUMENT HISTORY


**1| OBJECTIVE, SCOPE, APPLICABILITY AND ENTRY INTO FORCE**

### 1.1 | Objectives

1.1.1 | The objectives of the “Validation and Verification Standard” are to:

```
a. Enhance consistency and clarity of minimum requirements for
validation and verification activities under GS4GG;
b. Improve the quality and consistency in the preparation, execution and
reporting of GS4GG validation and verification activities;
c. Enhance the overall efficiency and integrity of the GS4GG.
```
### 1.2 | Scope and Applicability

1.2.1 | This document provides Validation and Verification Bodies (VVBs) with
minimum requirements to perform Validation, and Verification of GS4GG
activities - including projects, PoAs and their Voluntary Project Activities
(VPAs), based on approved GS4GG rules and requirements.

1.2.2 | The requirements outlined in this document apply to all activities seeking
certification of emission reductions and/or removals, and other sustainable
development impacts under GS4GG and any earlier versions of Gold
Standard.

1.2.3 | The VVBs shall refer to the Validation & Verification Body Requirements for
assessing and understanding requirements and procedures for:
a. seeking approval/re-approval to become a GS-VVB and be eligible for
performing validation and verification activities, and
b. maintaining eligibility as a GS-VVB to conduct validation and
verification activities.

1.2.4 | If it is found at any stage of the project/PoA that a VVB and/or Project
Developer has engaged in malfeasance or fraud, Gold Standard retains the
right to take action against such entities. The actions may include but are not
limited to suspension of the project with immediate effect, retraction of
certified products & statements, blacklisting entities and their registry
accounts, or cancellation of VVB approval status.

### 1.3 | Entry into force

1.3.1 | The Version 2 .0 of the Validation and Verification Standard enters into force
on 05/12/2024. VVB shall demonstrate full compliance with the requirements
of this standard for any new audit activity (validation, verification, design
change, renewal of crediting period etc.) for which the contract(s) between
VVB and the project developer/Coordinating and Management Entity (CME) is
signed on or after this standard enters into force.

1.3.2 | The VVB may voluntarily apply this standard to any new or ongoing audit
activity for certification after its publication date.

1.3.3 | The VVB shall ensure that where this standard is not mandatorily applicable
as per para 1.3.1 |, such as ongoing audits, the audit activities are completed
as per the applicable CDM, Gold Standard and best practice requirements.


**2| TERMS AND DEFINITIONS**

2.1.1 | In addition to the definitions contained in the GS4GG Glossary, located on the
GS4GG website, the following terms apply in this document:
a. “Shall” is used to indicate requirements to be followed;
b. “Should” is used to indicate that among several possibilities, one
course of action is recommended as particularly suitable;
c. “May” is used to indicate what is permitted.

**3| PRINCIPLES**

The following principles^1 guide the preparation, execution, and reporting of validation
and verification activities by GS VVBs.

### 3.1 | Independence

3.1.1 | Remain independent of the activity in the process of validation or verification,
and free from bias and conflict of interest. Maintain objectivity throughout the
validation or verification to ensure that the findings and conclusions are based
on objective evidence generated during the validation or verification.

### 3.2 | Ethical Conduct

3.2.1 | Demonstrate ethical conduct through trust, integrity, confidentiality and
discretion throughout the validation or verification.

### 3.3 | Fair presentation

3.3.1 | Reflect truthfully and accurately the validation or verification activity, findings,
conclusions and reports. Report significant obstacles encountered during the
validation or verification, as well as unresolved and/or diverging opinions
among validators or verifiers, the standard (Gold Standard) and the client
(e.g., the Project Developers).

### 3.4 | Due professional care

3.4.1 | Exercise due professional care and judgement based on the importance of the
task performed and the confidence placed by clients and intended users. Have
the necessary skills and competences to undertake the validation or
verification.

(^1) Sourced and adapted from ISO 14064-3:2006 - Greenhouse gases - Part 3: Specification with
guidance for the validation and verification of greenhouse gas assertions. This standard can be
obtained from any ISO member from the website of the ISO Central Secretariat at the
following address: <www.iso.org>. Copyright remains with ISO.


## SECTION A: GENERAL VALIDATION AND VERIFICATION REQUIREMENTS

**4| GENERAL VALIDATION AND VERIFICATION APPROACH**

4.1.1 | The VVB shall select a competent team to perform the validation or
verification for the project, PoA or VPA - collectively termed as ‘projects’
hereafter unless explicitly stated.

4.1.2 | In carrying out its validation or verification work, the VVB shall:

```
a. Follow this standard and integrate VVB’s own quality management
system, as approved by Gold Standard and/or assessed by the
relevant accreditation body;
b. Follow this standard, its provisions and most recent applicable
decisions and guidance provided by Gold Standard;
c. Determine whether each GS4GG project meets all applicable rules and
requirements, including those specified in the Principles and
Requirements, relevant Activity Requirements, Product Requirements,
Programme of Activity Requirements (where applicable), selected and
applied methodologies, methodological tools, templates and
guidelines as applicable to each project being validated/verified,
taking into account applicable Rule Updates, Rule Clarifications and
guidance provided by Gold Standard, as well as any deviations
granted to the project;
d. Assess the accuracy, conservativeness^2 , relevance, completeness,
consistency and transparency of the information provided by the
Project Developers (PDs) or Coordinating and Managing Entity
(CME);^3
e. Determine whether information provided by the Project Developer(s)
or CME is reliable and credible;^4
f. Apply consistent validation/verification criteria:
```
(^2) Interpretations of conservativeness: Conservativeness is a principle that is used to choose
between options - when assessing comparable alternatives that are similar in completeness
and accuracy. Consequently, the principles of completeness and accuracy always apply and the
principle of conservativeness may apply. Additionally, the principles of completeness and
accuracy apply before applying the principle of conservativeness. Conservativeness is
interpreted differently depending on the circumstances. For a project that is claiming emission
reductions for monetary value, the understatement of the baseline and overstatement of the
project emissions would be conservative. This principle is applicable to validation and
verification.
Adapted as per ISO 14064-3:2019(E), B.9 Interpretations of conservativeness.
(^3) Principles for each can be found in relevant applicable requirements
(^4) Information is credible if it is authentic and is able to inspire belief or trust, and the
willingness of persons to accept the quality of evidence. Information is reliable if the quality of
evidence is accurate and credible and able to yield the same results on a repeated basis.


```
i. To the requirements of the applicable regulatory documents (as
defined in point c above);
ii. To projects/PoAs with similar characteristics such as a similar
application of applicable regulatory documents e.g.
methodologies, use of technology, time period or region;
iii. To expert judgements, over time and among projects/PoAs;
g. Base its findings and conclusions on objective evidence and conduct
all validation or verification activities in accordance with GS4GG rules,
associated requirements and procedures;
h. Not intentionally omit evidence that is likely to alter the validation or
verification opinion;
i. Present information in the validation report or verification and
certification report in a factual, neutral and coherent manner and
document all assumptions, provide references to background
material, and identify changes made to the documentation;
j. Safeguard the confidentiality of all information obtained or created
during the validation or verification.
```
**5| USE OF AND COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE STANDARDS**

5.1.1 | In carrying out its validation and verification work, the VVB shall use and
determine the compliance with the valid version of the applicable regulatory
documents^5 approved under GS4GG.

**6| GENERAL VALIDATION REQUIREMENTS**

### 6.1 | Objectives of validation

6.1.1 | The VVB shall conduct a thorough and independent assessment of the
proposed project (including standalone project, PoA and VPAs) against the
applicable GS4GG requirements and procedures.

### 6.2 | Validation approach

6.2.1 | In carrying out its validation work, the VVB shall:

```
a. Determine whether the proposed project complies with the
requirements of the applicable regulatory documents.
b. Assess the claims and assumptions in the Design Documentation (DD)
e.g. PDD, POA-DD, VPA-DD. The evidence used in this assessment
shall not be limited to that provided by the Project Developer (s) or
Coordinating and Managing Entity (CME).
c. Assess the evidence, claims assumptions made as part of the project
documentation, including (as applicable) but not limited to:
```
(^5) Regulatory document refers to applicable standards, methodologies, standardised baselines,
methodological tools, guidelines and other regulatory documents adopted by Gold Standard.


```
i. Stakeholder Consultation Report(s)
ii. SDG Impact Tool
iii. Safeguarding Principles Assessment
iv. Official Development Assistance (ODA) declaration
v. Other project documents e.g., Risks and Capacities Guidelines
d. Assess whether Project Developer(s)/ Coordinating and Managing
Entity (CME) addressed Forward Action Requests (FAR) (if any) from
the Preliminary Review stage.
```
### 6.3 | Means of validation

6.3.1 | The VVB shall follow the standard auditing techniques as described herein to
assess the information provided by the Project Developer(s) or Coordinating
and Managing Entity.

6.3.2 | In assessing the information, the VVB shall apply the means of validation
specified throughout this document and, where appropriate, standard auditing
techniques, including, but not limited to:
a. Document review involving:
i. A review of data and information;
ii. Cross checks between the information provided in the DD and
information from sources other than those used; if available,
the VVB’s sectoral or local expertise; and, if necessary,
independent background investigations.
b. Follow-up actions (e.g., on-site inspection and telephone or e-mail
interviews), including:
i. Interviews with relevant stakeholders in the host country, such
as personnel with knowledge of the activity design and
implementation;
ii. Cross checks between information provided by interviewed
personnel (i.e., by checking sources or other interviews) to
ensure that no relevant information has been omitted;
iii. Take necessary steps to maintain, avoid bias and undue
influence from Project Developer(s) in selection of stakeholders
and interviews.
c. Reference available information relating to projects or technologies
similar to the proposed activity under validation;
d. Review, based on the selected methodologies and related documents
(like standardised baselines, tools and guidelines), of the
appropriateness of formulae and accuracy of all calculations;
e. Sampling approach in accordance with the applied methodology(ies)
and/or latest version of “Standard: Sampling and surveys for CDM
project activities and programme of activities” including:
i. A random sampling for cases where the Project Developer
(s)/CME did not apply a sampling approach;


```
ii. An acceptance sampling or another sampling approach for
cases where the Project Developer(s)/CME applied a sampling
approach.
Where inconsistency occurs, requirements outlined in the
applied methodology(ies) takes precedence. The VVB may
apply stricter sampling approaches based on activity related
risks.
a. Site visit requirements for standalone project activities
```
6.3.3 | The timing and type of the VVB validation site visit, physical or remote, shall
be determined and conducted in accordance with:
a. The GHG Emissions Reductions and Sequestration Product
Requirements (on the timing of the first physical site visit)
b. The Site Visit and Remote Audit Requirements (on required mode of
the validation site visit i.e. physical, remote or hybrid)
c. It is optional for the VVB to conduct a physical site visit for:
i. Validation of a standalone project activity for design
certification
ii. Design certification renewal of a standalone project activity,
iii. Post-registration changes to a design certified standalone
project activity.

6.3.4 | If the VVB conducts an on-site inspection for the instances mentioned in para
6.3.3 | above, it does not necessarily need to include a visit to the
geographical locations where project will be or are implemented but could be
to the office of the Project Developer or Coordinating/Managing Entity. If the
VVB doesn’t conduct an onsite inspection as means of validation, the VVB
shall describe the alternative means used and justify that they are sufficient
for the purpose of validation.
**b. Site visit requirements for PoAs and VPAs**

6.3.5 | The site visit requirements shall be in accordance with the provisions of
Programme of Activity Requirements. Validation of PoA and its real case VPAs
shall include a site visit by a VVB who assesses the up-front design and
monitoring plan for a PoA and its real case VPA against applicable
requirements. This includes validation of:
a. The PoA and VPA documentation including the design document and
monitoring & reporting plan, including any updates to the key project
information after listed status has been achieved.
b. Any supporting document and evidence to demonstrate conformity to
all applicable GS4GG requirements.

6.3.6 | For regular VPAs that are included using the regular inclusion process, which
involves a compliance check by the VVB, conducting a site visit is not
mandatory for validation. However, if the inclusion is done without a VVB site
visit, a site visit shall be conducted within two years of a VPA’s start date for
any other proceeding certification process, such as verification.


6.3.7 | For regular VPAs directly included by the CME following the fast track inclusion
pathway, a VVB shall conduct the site visit within two years of a VPA’s start
date for any proceeding certification process such as verification.

6.3.8 | For VPAs following combined inclusion and issuance of real case and regular
VPAs, the VVB shall conduct a validation (real case VPAs)/compliance check
(regular VPAs) for inclusion of new VPA in the PoA. The VVB shall conduct a
verification of all new VPAs and/or any existing VPAs. The VVB may combine
verification assessment for all VPAs with same monitoring period start and
end date in a single Verification Report. Also, the VVB may carry out a
combined site visit for both validation and verification process. A VVB site visit
is mandatory in such case.

6.3.9 | Renewal of PoA period shall include a site visit by a VVB who assesses the PoA
against all GS4GG Requirements. A VVB shall validate the PoA and real case
VPA for renewal of certification cycle. For regular VPAs renewal of
certification, the CME may select any of the pathways outlined for inclusion of
VPAs.

6.3.10 | For microscale Programme of Activity, same approach as for any other scale is
applied.

6.3.11 | Where no specific means of validation are specified, the VVB shall apply the
standard auditing techniques described in paragraph 6.3.2 | above.

6.3.12 | The VVB shall use any mandatory templates to document audit techniques, if
applicable to the activity type being audited.
**c. Corrective Action Requests (CARs), Clarification Requests (CLs) and
Forward Action Requests (FARs) by the VVB**

6.3.13 | If the VVB identifies issues that require further elaboration, research or
expansion in order to determine whether the project, PoA, VPA meets the
GS4GG requirements and procedures and can achieve credible emission
reductions and SDG impacts, the VVB shall ensure that these issues are
accurately identified, formulated, discussed and concluded in the validation
report.

6.3.14 | The VVB shall raise a Corrective Action Request (CAR) if one of the following
situations occurs:
a. The Project Developer(s) has made mistakes that will influence the
ability of the proposed project to achieve real, measurable, verifiable
and additional emission reductions/GHG Removals and SDG impacts
(e.g., establishment of inaccurate baseline scenario(s),
implementation of incorrect/inapplicable methodological steps and/or
data and parameter values for calculation of emission reductions and
SDG impacts, adoption of erroneous estimations/assumptions for
demonstration of additionality etc.);
b. The applicable GS4GG requirements and procedures have not been
met (e.g., partial or complete non-compliance with applicable
regulatory documents, e.g. local stakeholder engagement,
safeguarding principles assessment and sustainable development
impact assessment etc.);


```
c. There is a risk that GHG emission reductions and SDG impacts cannot
be monitored or calculated.
```
6.3.15 | The VVB shall raise a Clarification Request (CL) if information is insufficient or
not clear enough to determine whether the applicable GS4GG requirements
and procedures have been met.

6.3.16 | The VVB shall raise a Forward Action Request (FAR) during validation to
identify issues related to project implementation that require review during
the first verification(s) of the proposed project, PoA, VPAs (e.g., confirming
implementation status of the activity, establishing the technical specifications
of the equipment installed, demonstrating compliance with relevant
monitoring/measurement requirements etc.). The VVB shall not raise a FAR
that relates to the GS4GG rules and requirements to confirm Design Certified
status of the project, PoA and/or VPA.

6.3.17 | The VVB shall resolve or “close out” CARs and CLs only if the Project
Developer(s)/CME modify the activity design, rectify the DD(s), or provide
additional explanations or evidence that satisfy the VVB’s concerns. If this is
not done, the VVB shall not submit a request for Design Certification of the
proposed project, PoA and VPA.

6.3.18 | The VVB shall report on all CARs, CLs and FARs in its Validation Report. This
reporting shall explain the issues raised, the responses provided by the
Project Developer(s)/CME, the means of validation of such responses and
references to any resulting changes in the DD(s) or supporting annexes.
**d. Corrective Action Requests (CARs), Clarification Requests (CLs) and
Forward Action Requests (FARs) by the Gold Standard**

6.3.19 | Should the Gold Standard raise CARs, CLs, and/or FARs within the Design
Certification Review process:
a. For the Project Developer(s)/CME: the VVB shall assess how the
Project Developer(s)/CME has addressed the CARs, CLs and/or FARs
before the response is sent to the Gold Standard. The project
documentation may need to be updated accordingly to ensure that its
final version reflects accurately the characteristics and expected
impact of the project, PoA and/or VPA(s).
b. For the VVB: the VVB shall address the CARs, CLs, and/or FARs before
the response is sent to the Gold Standard. The Validation Report shall
be updated accordingly to ensure that its final version reflects
accurately the characteristics and expected impact of the project.

### 6.4 | Risk assessment - PoA Validation

6.4.1 | As part of PoA validation, the VVB shall validate the appropriateness of the
sampling approach (including approach proposed for site-visits) as part of the
Validation Report. The VVB shall take into account the following factors,
amongst others, while assessing proposed sampling approach for validation:
a. Risks related to the type(s) of project activity/technology/geographic
location
b. Risks related to non-identification of emission and leakage sources


```
c. Risks related to double counting, especially in the case of distributed
technologies
d. Uncertainty with respect to the data monitored etc.
e. Risks related to environmental, economic or social safeguards
f. Risks on account of previous VPA having been erroneously included or
other VPA facing significant grievances from local stakeholders or
ongoing legal cases for existing VPA etc.
```
### 6.5 | Use of applicable document templates

6.5.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the DD and project documentation have
been completed using the valid version of the DD template, Stakeholder
Consultation Report(s), SDG Impact Tool, and any other applicable templates.

6.5.2 | The VVB shall state its opinion on whether the project, PoA, VPA(s) has been
submitted using the valid version of the relevant templates and following the
instructions therein, and in related guidance documents.

### 6.6 | Preparation and submission of VVB reports

6.6.1 | The VVB contracted to conduct;

```
a. validation of a proposed activity, design changes or design
certification renewal of a design certified project or renewal of a
design certified PoA period or inclusion of VPAs in a design certified
PoA, shall prepare and submit a Validation Report using the valid
version of the relevant validation report form^6.
b. verification and certification for the implementation of the design
certified project or PoA or included VPAs and monitored emission
reductions and SDG impacts shall prepare a Verification and
Certification Report using the valid version of the relevant verification
and certification report form.
```
6.6.2 | The VVB shall include in every report a full list of staff, staff of outsourced
entities, and subcontracted individuals (including team leaders, auditors,
technical reviewers, technical experts, country/local experts, interpreters,
audit equipment operators, etc.) participating in the assessment, including
their full names, affiliation, role in the assessment, and competence relevant
to the assessment (sectoral scope, country expertise, etc.), as well as
whether they are or not an approved Gold Standard auditor.

### 6.7 | Use of applicable Global Warming Potentials

6.7.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the Global Warming Potentials (GWPs) were
correctly applied in the design documents (DDs e.g. PDD, PoA-DD and VPA-
DD) and in the Monitoring Report in accordance with relevant GS4GG
requirements.

(^6) The VVB shall use the validation report forms available on the UNFCCC CDM website with
appropriate changes as needed to fulfil GS4GG requirements, if applicable form is not provided
on GS4GG website.


### 6.8 | Validation and Verification by same VVB

6.8.1 | If the same VVB wishes to perform verification of a given activity for which
they have performed validation activity (including the inclusion of VPA, design
certification renewal, design change review), the VVB shall ensure that the
integrity and impartiality of the verification audit are maintained. In such
cases, the VVB shall meet the following requirements:
a. The VVB shall ensure that the entire verification audit team, including
the lead auditors, auditors, technical reviewers and sectoral experts,
are different from the team that performed the validation activity
(including the inclusion of VPA, design certification renewal, design
change review).
b. The VVB shall transparently disclose in the verification report that the
same VVB has performed validation activity (including the inclusion of
VPA, design certification renewal, design change review) for the given
activity. The VVB shall disclose the details of the audit team, including
full names of all the team members and their roles in the previous
audit performed by the same VVB.
c. An exception to the above stated rule shall be for the technical
reviewer where the validating technical reviewer may participate in
the verification audit team, and a member of the validation audit
team may be the verifying technical reviewer.

6.8.2 | The requirement to have different audit teams does not apply to combined
design certification with first verification and performance review for a given
project, VPA (paragraph 5.1.53, Principles and Requirements). The same
audit team may perform both validation and verification for combined Design
Certification and first performance certification for a given project.


## SECTION B: STANDALONE PROJECT ACTIVITY

This section is applicable to standalone projects. For validation and verification
requirements for PoA/VPAs please refer to Section C below.

**7| VALIDATION FOR DESIGN CERTIFICATION**

### 7.1 | Type and Scale

7.1.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the activity type and scale of proposed
project is correctly identified in accordance with the relevant GS4GG
requirements and procedures.

### 7.2 | Purpose and general description of proposed project

7.2.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the description of the proposed project in
the PDD is accurate, complete, and provides an understanding of the
proposed project.

7.2.2 | The VVB shall validate that:

```
a. the project is eligible under GS4GG Principles and Requirements and
all applicable regulatory documents. The VVB shall state its opinion on
the compliance of the project with each eligibility criterion, as
applicable.
b. the project has addressed Forward Action Requests (if any) from the
Preliminary Review stage.
```
7.2.3 | If the proposed project involves the alteration of an existing installation or
process, the VVB shall assess whether the project description states the
differences resulting from the project compared to the pre-project situation.

7.2.4 | There may be different aspects of the pre-project situation relevant to
different intended SDG impacts. The VVB shall assess if the pre-project
situation relevant to each SDG impact is addressed as per para 6.2.1 | above.

7.2.5 | If the project area overlaps with that of design certified Gold Standard
project(s) and/or project(s) from any other voluntary or compliance standard
programme of a similar nature, the VVB shall confirm that there is no double
counting of impacts at design and performance certification (for example use
of similar technology or practices through which the potential arises for
double counting or misestimation of impacts amongst projects). In doing so,
the VVB shall use its local and sectoral expertise and, where applicable, refer
to Annex A - Double Counting Requirements of GHG Emissions Reduction &
Sequestration Product Requirements.

7.2.6 | The VVB shall:

```
a. Describe the process undertaken to validate the accuracy and
completeness of the project description;
b. State its opinion on the accuracy and completeness of the project
description and eligibility as required in para 6 .2.1 above.
```

### 7.3 | Project boundary

7.3.1 | The VVB shall assess the boundary of the proposed project in terms of
geographical area (e.g. municipality, region within a country, country or
several countries) within which activity will be implemented.

7.3.2 | The VVB shall determine whether, in establishing the boundary of the
proposed project, the Project Developer has taken into consideration all
applicable national and/or sectoral policies and regulations within the chosen
boundary.

### 7.4 | Demonstration of additionality

7.4.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the proposed project is additional as
demonstrated in the PDD.

7.4.2 | The VVB shall assess and verify the reliability and credibility of all data,
rationales, assumptions, justifications and documentation provided by the
Project Developer(s) to support the demonstration of additionality. This
requires the VVB to assess critically the evidence presented, using local
knowledge and sectoral and financial expertise.

7.4.3 | If required by the applied methodology(ies), the VVB shall consider
methodological tools and guidelines provided to demonstrate the additionality
of proposed project. The VVB shall also consider specific complementary or
alternative requirements included in the applied methodology(ies) for
demonstrating the additionality of the proposed project activity.

7.4.4 | The VVB shall describe all steps taken and sources of information used to
crosscheck the information contained in the design document. The VVB shall
describe how it has determined that the evidence assessed is credible, where
appropriate.

7.4.5 | If investment analysis has been used to demonstrate the additionality of the
proposed project activity, the VVB shall determine whether the proposed
project activity would not be:
a. The most economically or financially attractive alternative; or
b. Economically or financially feasible without the revenue from the sale
of GS VERs.

7.4.6 | The VVB shall:

```
a. Describe in detail how the parameters used in any financial
calculations have been validated;
b. Describe how the suitability of any benchmark applied has been
assessed;
c. Confirm whether the underlying assumptions are appropriate, and the
financial calculations are correct.
d. Confirm whether the proposed project activity is not common
practice.
```

### 7.5 | Demonstration of prior consideration.......................................................

7.5.1 | If the stakeholder consultation for the Project was conducted after the start
date of the Project i.e., retroactive project or prior consideration justification
is required as per activity requirements, the VVB shall determine whether
revenue from carbon credits were considered necessary in the decision to
undertake the project as a proposed project activity.

7.5.2 | The VVB shall assess whether the Project Developer:

```
a. Had an awareness of the carbon revenue prior to the project activity
start date, and that the benefits of the carbon revenue were a
decisive factor in the decision to proceed with the project. Evidence to
support this could include, inter alia, minutes and/or notes related to
the consideration of the decision by the board of directors, or
equivalent, of the Project Developer(s), to undertake the project as a
proposed project activity;
b. Demonstrated that real and continuing actions were taken to secure
eligibility status for carbon revenue as per GS4GG or other similar
standard for example CDM, for the project in parallel with its
implementation.
```
7.5.3 | Assessment of real and continuing actions shall be conducted by the VVB and
should focus on real documented evidence as indicated in para 7.5.2 | above,
including an assessment by the VVB of the authenticity of the evidence. The
VVB shall assess letters, e-mail exchanges and other documented
communications submitted by the Project Developer to substantiate the above
information, and these shall be considered as evidence only after the VVB has
assessed the reliability and authenticity of such communications, inter alia
through cross-checking (e.g., interviews).

7.5.4 | In validating a proposed project activity where:

```
a. There is a gap of less than two years between the documented
evidence, the VVB shall conclude that continuing and real actions
were taken to secure GS4GG status for the project activity;
b. A gap between documented evidence is greater than two years and
less than three years, the VVB may determine that continuing and
real actions were taken to secure GS4GG status for the project
activity and shall justify any positive or negative validation opinion
based on the context of the evidence and information assessed;
c. A gap between documented evidence is greater than three years, the
VVB shall conclude that continuing and real actions were not taken to
secure GS4GG status for the project activity.
```
7.5.5 | The validation report shall:

```
a. Describe the evidence for prior consideration of the carbon revenue (if
necessary) that was assessed and the process of cross-checking the
evidence, including the real and continuing action;
```

```
Provide a validation opinion regarding whether the proposed project
activity complies with the applicable requirements related to the prior
consideration of the carbon revenue.
```
### 7.6 | Start date, crediting period type and duration

7.6.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the Project Developer(s) specified the
following for the proposed project in accordance with relevant GS4GG
requirements:
a. Start date of the proposed project;
b. Expected operational lifetime;
c. Type and duration of the crediting period;
d. Start date of the crediting period.

7.6.2 | The VVB shall assess the start date and crediting period type and duration
specified in the PDD by means of a document review, use of official sources
and its local and sectoral expertise, interviews with relevant personnel and/or,
where conducted through a remote or an on-site/physical inspection (as
applicable).

7.6.3 | The VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess and state its opinion on the
compliance of start date and crediting period type and duration specified in
the PDD with the relevant GS4GG requirements. The VVB shall also provide
its opinion on the retroactive crediting (if applicable).

### 7.7 | Safeguarding Assessment

7.7.1 | The VVB shall determine whether an upfront assessment against the
Safeguarding Principles had been carried out and the project has been
implemented in accordance with the requirements set out in Safeguarding
Principles and Requirements.

7.7.2 | The VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess the requirements and state
its opinion on whether:
a. assessment applies to the project scenario (although assessment
questions and requirements involve a comparison to the baseline
scenario(s) and/or the implementation or decommissioning phases of
a Project);
b. the Project Developer(s) has provided suitable responses and their
justifications to the non-exhaustive list of assessment questions set
out against each Safeguarding Principle (listed in the Safeguarding
Principles and Requirements document);
c. for requirements that are not accompanied by an assessment
question, the Safeguarding Principles Assessment includes a
description with justifications on how a project met these
requirements;
d. where a risk is identified, the requirements have been used to guide
re-design/mitigation proposals, i.e., the response to a given outcome


```
has been designed with the intention of achieving the stated
requirements.
e. where Safeguarding Principles and Requirements requires opinion and
recommendations of Expert Stakeholder(s), the Project Developer(s)
has demonstrated that the Expert Stakeholders have conducted a
thorough review (and, if needed, an onsite visit) and that their
recommendations have been suitably incorporated into the project
design.
f. The Project Developer(s) has provided appropriate level of
information with regards to Safeguarding Assessment at different
project stages listed below (in line with the requirements of paragraph
2.1.11 (Table 2) of Safeguarding Principles and Requirements):
i. Stakeholder Consultation;
ii. Preliminary Review;
iii. Design Review;
iv. Performance Review.
```
7.7.3 | The VVB shall invoke Non-Conformity section of the Gold Standard Principles
and Requirements in case it identifies any failure, during validation, in respect
to the completion of the Safeguarding Principles Assessment, including
conformity with Requirements and Monitoring & Reporting Requirements. The
VVB shall record the Non-Conformity(ies) and provide its justification and
opinion in the Validation Report.

7.7.4 | The VVB shall assess the appropriateness and feasibility of the re-
design/mitigation proposals, by means of review of the documented
procedures, interviews with relevant personnel, project plans and, where
conducted through a remote or an on-site/physical inspection (as applicable)
of the proposed project.

7.7.5 | The VVB shall also determine whether the Project Developer(s) conducted an
environmental impact assessment, if considered significant by the Project
Developer(s) or by the host Party, in accordance with the host Party’s
procedures.

7.7.6 | The VVB shall assess the above requirements by means of a document review
and/or using local official sources and expertise.

7.7.7 | The VVB shall

```
a. describe steps taken to validate the sources of information used to
cross check the assessment and information related to Safeguarding
Principles Assessment contained in the DD:
b. state its opinion on the adequacy of the Safeguarding Principles
Assessment conducted by the Project Developer(s).
```

### 7.8 | Gender Sensitivity Assessment

7.8.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the proposed project has demonstrated
compliance with the mandatory requirements as outlined in Gender Equality
Requirements and Guidelines.

### 7.9 | Contribution to Sustainable Development Goals

7.9.1 | The VVB shall determine whether proposed projects have demonstrated clear,
direct contribution to sustainable development, defined as making
demonstrable, positive impacts on at least three Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), one of which must be SDG 13 in accordance with the
requirements set out in Principles and Requirements.

7.9.2 | The VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess the requirements and state
its opinion on whether:
a. All assumptions and data used by the Project Developer(s) are listed
in the PDD, including their references and sources;
b. All documentation used by the Project Developer(s) as the basis for
assumptions and source of data is correctly quoted and interpreted in
the PDD;
c. Potential SDG Impacts are a primary effect – an intentional, direct
effect of the proposed project and not a ‘one off’ or an effect
generated in design, construction, distribution, start-up or
decommissioning of the proposed project;
d. The proposed project has identified potential SDG Impacts by
comparing the project scenario to the baseline scenario (note that
multiple baseline scenarios may be relevant depending on the SDG
impacts and/or methodologies followed). In other words, the SDG
impacts shall be demonstrated as making a positive effect beyond
what would reasonably be expected to occur in the baseline scenario.
e. The proposed project has identified relevant monitoring indicators
and/or monitoring parameters and described the monitoring approach
in the PDD to inform future Monitoring Reports (MRs).
f. Where certain SDG Impacts require opinion and recommendations of
Expert Stakeholder(s), the Project Developer(s) has demonstrated
that the Expert Stakeholders have conducted a thorough review (and,
if needed, an onsite visit) and that their recommendations have been
suitably incorporated into the project design and monitoring and
reporting plan.

7.9.3 | The VVB shall

```
a. describe other steps taken, and sources of information used to
crosscheck the information related to contribution to SDGs contained
in the PDD;
b. state its opinion on the adequacy of the SDGs Assessment conducted
by the Project Developer(s).
```

### 7.10 | Stakeholder Consultation

7.10.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the Project Developer(s) have completed
the Stakeholder Consultation and are carrying out an ongoing stakeholder
engagement process in accordance with the relevant requirements in the
Stakeholder Consultation and Engagement Requirements.

7.10.2 | The VVB shall determine whether there are applicable host country rules on
Stakeholder Consultation. Where such rules exist, the VVB shall, by means of
document review and interviews with local stakeholders and/or the
Designated National Authority (DNA)^7 , as appropriate, determine whether the
Stakeholder Consultation was conducted in accordance with the rules.

7.10.3 | If applicable host country rules on Stakeholder Consultation do not exist, the
VVB shall, by means of document review and interviews with local
stakeholders and/or the DNA as appropriate, determine whether the
Stakeholder Consultation was conducted in accordance with the requirements
in the Stakeholder Consultation and Engagement Requirements pertaining to:
a. Scope of Stakeholder Consultation
b. Timing of Stakeholder Consultation
c. Minimum group of stakeholders to be consulted
d. Means for inviting stakeholders
e. Information to be made available to stakeholders
f. Conduct of consultation
g. Continuous input and grievance mechanism
h. Consideration of comments received
i. Ongoing monitoring and reporting mechanism
j. Stakeholder Consultation documentation

7.10.4 | Notwithstanding the requirements stated in paragraph 7.10 | above, the VVB
shall describe the steps taken to assess the requirements and state its opinion
on whether:
a. The Stakeholder Consultation comprised of a minimum of two rounds
of consultation including one mandatory physical meeting and one
stakeholder feedback round lasting for at least one month and these
consultations were open to anyone wishing to attend.
b. The Project Developer(s) has identified and informed all relevant
(local, affected and interested) stakeholders, including relevant local
and national authorities, the Gold Standard Secretariat and all Gold
Standard NGO Supporters active in the host country of the proposed
project.

(^7) List of DNAs is available at https://cdm.unfccc.int/DNA/bak/index.html


```
c. The Stakeholder Consultation has been conducted prior to the start
date of the proposed project. If the Consultation has been conducted
after the start date, the Project Developer(s) has provided further
explanation of how comments received during the consultation are
taken into account and implement a Grievance Mechanism in line with
the Stakeholder Consultation & Engagement Requirements.
d. The Project Developer(s) has shared with the stakeholder the
information on the proposed project’s objective, scale and duration,
contribution to sustainable development and compliance with
safeguard.
e. Where Safeguarding Principles and SDG Impacts Assessment requires
opinion and recommendations of Expert Stakeholder(s), the Project
Developer has demonstrated that the Expert Stakeholders have
conducted a thorough review (and, if needed, an onsite visit) and that
their recommendations have been suitably incorporated into the
project design.
f. The proposed project has established a formal input, feedback and
grievance mechanism in place and the grievance mechanism shall be
discussed during the Stakeholder Consultations as per Stakeholder
Consultation & Engagement Requirements.
g. The proposed project has prepared the Stakeholder Consultation
Report of the consultation process, including consultation feedback
and how this was incorporated into the project design. Moreover, the
Stakeholder Consultation Report has been submitted to Gold Standard
at the time of first submission to GS (though this date may be after
the Project Start Date).
```
7.10.5 | The VVB shall

```
a. describe steps taken, and sources of information used to crosscheck
the information related to Stakeholder Consultation contained in the
PDD and stakeholder consultation report.
b. describe the steps taken to assess the adequacy of the local
stakeholder consultation;
c. state its opinion on the adequacy of the local stakeholder
consultation.
```
### 7.11 | Approval and Authorisation

7.11.1 | The VVB shall validate that the Letter of Authorisation & Authorisation
checklist - if available at the time of validation, for the following information:
a. It has been issued by relevant National Focal Point designated by the
Host Country or Countries, under its arrangements for providing
Article 6 Authorisation.
b. In the Letter of Authorisation, the host country has:


```
i. Identified the project/activity^8
ii. Authorised the project’s emission reductions or removals,
issued as credits (tCO2eq units^9 ), for use ITMOs under Article 6
of the Paris Agreement.
iii. Declared that the Host Country will not use the project’s
emission reductions or removals to implement and achieve its
NDC and will account for the project’s emission reductions and
removals as ITMOs under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement by
applying corresponding adjustments in accordance with
relevant decisions by the CMA.
iv. In cases where the Host Country has authorised the use of
GSVERs towards other international mitigation purposes, or
more specifically to either international mitigation purposes or
other purposes, specified whether the Host Country will apply
corresponding adjustments^10 upon (i) the authorisation or (ii)
the issuance of GSVERs, in accordance with the Paris
Requirements.
v. Include an official email address for the designated National
Focal Point.
```
### 7.12 | Application of baseline and monitoring methodology(ies)

```
a. General requirements
```
7.12.1 | The VVB shall validate

```
a. Applicability of selected baseline and monitoring methodology(ies)
and related documents are applicable to the proposed project and
b. Validity of applied version of monitoring methodology(ies), associated
tools and guidance as per the time of first submission (preliminary
review) or submission for validation as applicable. Refer to GHG
Emission Reduction and Sequestration Product Requirements for
further details.
c. Deviations from methodology and/or methodological tool (if already
approved) or VVB may seek guidance on acceptability of deviation
from selected methodology or methodology tool if VVB finds that a
revision of the methodology and/or methodological tool would not be
required to address the project-specific issue^11. In such cases, the
```
(^8) Project/activity refers to an individual project activity.
(^9) If the GWP value used by a country in its NDC reporting is different than the GWP value
applied for issued credits, Gold Standard will convert the issued credit volume by applying the
GWP values that country uses in its NDC reporting so as to provide the numbers that host
country should adjust.
(^10) Relevant adjustments may include indicative adjustments, if the host country is applying
corresponding adjustments to their single-year NDC by calculating the average annual amount
of ITMOs first transferred and used over the implementation period.
(^11) Examples of project-specific issues include, but are not limited to, the following:


```
VVB shall include an assessment of the case including demonstration
that the deviation does not require revision of the selected
methodology or methodological tool, and shall include a description of
the impact of the deviation on GHG emission reductions or net
anthropogenic GHG removals by the proposed project activity.
```
7.12.2 | The VVB shall apply specific guidance and/or clarifications provided by the
Gold Standard with respect to the approved methodologies, standardised
baselines and other methodological regulatory documents that are selected by
the Project Developer.

7.12.3 | The VVB shall determine whether the selected methodology(ies), and related
documents apply to the proposed project and were correctly applied with
respect to the following:
a. Project boundary;
b. Identification of baseline scenario;
c. Demonstration of additionality;
d. Explanation of methodological choices/approaches for estimating the
SDG Impact
e. Algorithms and/or formulae used to determine emission
reductions/removals and SDG impacts (if applicable);
f. Monitoring and reporting methodology.

7.12.4 | The VVB shall determine whether the proposed project meets all the
applicability conditions of the selected methodology(ies) and related
regulatory documents. This shall be done by validating the documentation
referred to in the PDD and by verifying that the documentation content is

```
a. The methodology requires measurements using instrumentation of certain specifications
or using a certain method. The Project Developer(s) of the proposed project activity
identify a difficulty in acquiring the specified instrumentation or difficulty in
implementing the measurement method; however, they can achieve comparable
accuracy of measured parameters using an alternative instrumentation or measurement
method;
b. A proposed project activity does not have access to the data sources specified by the
methodology for a certain parameter; a different source of data can be accessed by the
project activity to estimate the parameter with equal reliability and accuracy;
c. A minor deviation is sought for a project-specific situation, which is well justified and
conservative. For example: a methodology requires limiting production in the project
scenario between +/- 5% of rated capacity, if the historical baseline is to be applied.
Due to government restrictions, the plant has never been operated at its rated capacity
but at a capacity which is much below its rated capacity (20% below the rated
capacity). A deviation can be presented specifying conservative approaches to calculate
the emission reduction in such a project-specific case;
d. A conservative estimation technique or default factor suggested addressing
uncertainties related to project-specific situations, which are not addressed in the
methodology. For example, a well-justified conservative uncertainty factor proposed to
be used in equations of baseline emissions to address uncertainties in the real-life
situation during the crediting period.
```

```
correctly quoted and interpreted in the PDD. If the VVB, based on local and
sectoral knowledge, is aware that comparable information is available from
credible sources other than that used in the PDD, then the VVB shall cross
check the PDD against other sources to confirm that the proposed project
meets the applicability conditions of the selected methodology(ies) and
related documents within the applicable timelines as given in the
methodology.
```
7.12.5 | For each applicability condition listed in the selected methodology(ies) and
related documents, the VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess the
relevant information contained in the PDD against these criteria.

7.12.6 | The VVB shall state its opinion on the applicability of the selected
methodology(ies) and related documents to the proposed project.
**b. Project boundary, sources and greenhouse gases**

7.12.7 | The VVB shall determine whether all main GHG emission sources, the project
boundary of the proposed project, and other relevant project and baseline
emission sources/sinks covered in the applied methodology(ies) and related
documents included within the project boundary for the purpose of calculating
project and baseline emissions/removals for the proposed project.

7.12.8 | The VVB shall determine whether the justification provided to exclude GHG
emission sources is reasonable, based on an assessment of supporting
documented evidence provided by the Project Developer and corroborated by
observations if required.

7.12.9 | The VVB shall confirm the project boundary based on documented evidence
and shall corroborate it by a remote or an on-site/physical inspection (as
applicable). VVB shall confirm that such an inspection is appropriate to the
nature, type and scale of activity. Where site visit is not conducted at the time
of Validation, the VVB shall raise a FAR for 1st verification to confirm the
project boundary based on documented evidence.

7.12.10 | The VVB shall describe how the validation of the project boundary has been
performed by detailing the documentation assessed (e.g., a commissioning
report) and by describing its observations during any remote or an on-
site/physical inspection undertaken (i.e., observations of the physical site or
equipment used in the process).

7.12.11 | The VVB shall state whether the identified boundary and the selected
sources and gases are justified for the proposed project. Should the VVB
identify emission sources that will be affected by the implementation of the
project activity and which are expected to contribute more than 1 per cent of
the overall expected average annual GHG emission reductions or net
anthropogenic GHG removals, and are not addressed by the applied
methodologies or the applied standardised baselines, the VVB shall request a
clarification of, revision to, or deviation from the methodologies or the
standardised baselines, as appropriate.


### 7.13 | Baseline scenario

7.13.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the baseline identified for the proposed
project is the scenario that reasonably represents the anthropogenic
emissions by sources of GHGs / removals by sinks that would occur in the
absence of the proposed project.

7.13.2 | The VVB shall determine whether any procedure contained in the applied
methodology(ies) to identify the most reasonable baseline scenario has been
correctly applied. If the applied methodology(ies) requires the use of
methodological tools (such as the CDM’s “Tool for the demonstration and
assessment of additionality” and the “Combined tool to identify the baseline
scenario and demonstrate additionality”) to establish the baseline scenario,
the VVB shall consult the methodologies on the application of these
methodological tools. In such cases, the specific guidance in the
methodologies shall supersede the corresponding requirements of the
methodological tools.

7.13.3 | If the applied methodology(ies) requires several alternative scenarios to be
considered in the identification of the most plausible baseline scenario, the
VVB shall, based on financial expertise and local and sectoral knowledge,
determine whether all scenarios that are considered by the Project Developers
and any scenarios that are supplementary to those required by the
methodology(ies), are realistic and credible in the context of the proposed
project and that no alternative scenario has been excluded.

7.13.4 | The VVB shall determine whether the most plausible baseline scenario
identified is reasonable by validating the assumptions, calculations and
rationales used in the PDD. It shall determine whether documents and
sources referred to in the PDD are correctly quoted and interpreted. The VVB
shall cross check the information provided in the PDD with other verifiable and
credible sources, such as local expert opinion, if available.

7.13.5 | The VVB shall determine whether, drawing on its knowledge of the sector
and/or advice from local experts, all applicable GS4GG requirements and
procedures have been taken into account in the identification of the baseline
scenario for the proposed project, as well as relevant national and/or sectoral
policies, regulations and circumstances. If the project area of the proposed
project overlaps with that of registered GS project(s) and/or project(s) from
any other voluntary or compliance standard programme of a similar nature,
the VVB may use the information/data available from such projects to cross-
check the baseline.

7.13.6 | The VVB shall determine whether the PDD provides a description of the
identified baseline scenario, including a description of the
technology(ies)/measures that would be employed and/or the activities that
would take place in the absence of the proposed project.

7.13.7 | The VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess the requirements and state
its opinion on whether:
a. All the assumptions and data used by the Project Developers are
listed in the PDD, including their references and sources;


```
b. All documentation used is relevant for establishing the baseline
scenario and correctly quoted and interpreted in the PDD;
c. Assumptions and data used in the identification of the baseline
scenario are justified appropriately, supported by evidence and can be
deemed reasonable;
d. Relevant national and/or sectoral policies, regulations and
circumstances are considered and listed in the PDD;
e. The applied methodologies have been correctly followed to identify
the most plausible baseline scenario and the identified baseline
scenario reasonably represents what would occur in the absence of
the proposed project.
```
7.13.8 | The VVB shall describe other steps taken and sources of information used to
crosscheck the information contained in the PDD.

### 7.14 | Estimation of emissions reductions or net anthropogenic removals

7.14.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the description of how to undertake the ex-
ante and ex-post calculations of baseline, project and leakage emissions as
well as emission reductions to be achieved by the proposed project is in
accordance with the applied methodology(ies) and related documents and,
where applicable, the latest version of the “Standard: Sampling and surveys
for CDM project activities and programme of activities”. The sampling
requirements of the applied methodology takes precedent in every case.

7.14.2 | Where the applied methodologies and related documents allow for selection
between options for equations or parameters, the VVB shall determine
whether adequate justification has been provided (based on the choice of the
baseline scenario, context of the proposed project and other evidence
provided) and that the correct equations and parameters have been used, in
accordance with the applied methodology(ies) and related documents.

7.14.3 | The VVB shall verify the justification given in the PDD for the choice of data
and parameters used in the equations:
a. **Data and parameters fixed ex ante:** The VVB shall determine
whether all data sources and assumptions are appropriate and
calculations are correct as applicable to the proposed project, and will
result in an accurate or otherwise conservative estimate of the
emission reductions. As applicable, the VVB shall determine whether
the sampling efforts were undertaken in accordance with the applied
methodology(ies) and related documents and, where applicable, latest
version of the CDM’s “Standard: Sampling and surveys for CDM
project activities and programme of activities”;
b. **Data and parameters to be monitored:** The VVB shall determine
whether the estimates provided in the PDD for these data and
parameters are reasonable. As applicable, the VVB shall determine
whether the sampling efforts were undertaken in accordance with the
applied methodology(ies) and related documents and, where


```
applicable, latest version of the CDM’s “Standard: Sampling and
surveys for CDM project activities and programme of activities”.
```
7.14.4 | The VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess the requirements and state
its opinion on whether:
a. All assumptions and data used by the Project Developer(s) are listed
in the PDD, including their references and sources;
b. All documentation used by the Project Developer(s) as the basis for
assumptions and source of data is correctly quoted and interpreted in
the PDD;
c. All values used in the PDD including GWPs are considered reasonable
in the context of the proposed project;
d. The methodology(ies) and related documents have been applied
correctly to calculate baseline, project and leakage emissions, as well
as emission reductions/removals;
e. All estimates of the baseline emissions can be replicated using the
data and parameter values provided in the PDD;
f. The sampling efforts were undertaken in accordance with the
methodological requirements/CDM’s “Standard: Sampling and surveys
for CDM project activities and programme of activities”, where the
applied methodologies require that the data and parameters be
determined in accordance with this standard.
g. Accounting and treatment of uncertainties of LUF parameters follows
Annex A of Land-use & Forests Activity Requirements.

7.14.5 | The VVB shall describe how it has verified the data and parameters used in
the equations, including references to any other data sources used.

### 7.15 | Monitoring Plan

7.15.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the description of the monitoring plan
included in the PDD complies with the applied methodology(ies) and related
documents and, where applicable, the CDM’s “Standard: Sampling and
surveys for CDM project activities and programme of activities”.

7.15.2 | The VVB shall apply a three-step process to meet the above requirement:

```
a. To assess compliance of the monitoring plan with the applied
methodology(ies) and related documents, the VVB shall:
i. Identify the list of parameters required by the applied
methodology(ies) and related documents by means of document
review;
ii. Confirm that the description of the monitoring plan contains all
necessary parameters, that they are described, and that the
means of monitoring described in the monitoring plan comply
with the requirements of the applied methodology(ies) and
related documents;
```

```
b. To assess the feasibility of the monitoring plan, the VVB shall, by
means of review of the documented procedures, interviews with
relevant personnel, project plans and, where conducted through a
remote or an on-site/physical inspection (as applicable) of the
proposed project, assess whether:
i. The monitoring arrangements described in the monitoring plan
are feasible within the project design;
ii. The means of implementation of the monitoring plan, including
the data management and quality assurance and quality control
procedures, are sufficient to ensure that emission
reductions/removals achieved by/resulting from the proposed
project can be reported ex-post and verified;
c. To determine whether the proposed sampling plan provides
parameter value estimates in an unbiased and reliable manner, where
the Project Developer(s) applied a sampling approach to determine
data and parameters, the VVBs shall assess the proposed sampling
plan in accordance with the methodology requirement/CDM’s
“Standard: Sampling and surveys for CDM project activities and
programme of activities”.
```
7.15.3 | The VVB shall:

```
a. State its opinion on the compliance of the monitoring plan with the
requirements of the applied methodology(ies) and related documents
and, where applicable, the CDM’s “Standard: Sampling and surveys
for CDM project activities and programme of activities”;
b. Describe the steps undertaken to assess whether the monitoring
arrangements described in the monitoring plan are feasible within the
project design;
c. State its opinion on the Project Developer’s ability to implement the
monitoring plan.
```
### 7.16 | Validation decision and report

```
a. Validation decision
```
7.16.1 | The VVB shall include a statement on the likelihood of the proposed project
achieving the anticipated emission reductions/GHG removals and SDG
Impacts stated in the PDD.

7.16.2 | The VVB shall notify the Project Developer(s) of the validation outcome. The
notification to the Project Developer(s) shall include:
a. A confirmation of validation and date of submission of the validation
report as part of the request for Design Certification of the proposed
project to Gold Standard; or
b. An explanation of reasons for non-acceptance if the proposed project,
as documented, is determined not to fulfil the requirements for
validation.


7.16.3 | The VVB shall provide either:

```
a. A positive validation decision in its Validation Report if the VVB
determines that the proposed project complies with the applicable
GS4GG requirements and procedures; or
b. A negative validation decision in its Validation Report explaining the
reason for its decision if the VVB determines that the proposed project
does not fulfil the applicable GS4GG requirements and procedures.
```
7.16.4 | The VVB shall include the following in its decision:

```
a. A summary of the validation method and process used and the
validation criteria applied;
b. A description of project components or issues not covered by the
validation process;
c. A summary of the validation conclusions;
d. A statement on the validation of the expected emission reductions
and SDG Impacts;
e. A statement on whether the proposed project meets the applicable
GS4GG requirements and procedures.
b. Validation Report
```
7.16.5 | The VVB shall report the results of its assessment in the Validation Report.

7.16.6 | In its Validation Report, the VVB shall provide the following:

```
a. A summary of the validation process and its conclusions;
b. Results of the dialogue between the VVB and the Project
Developer(s), as well as any adjustments made to the project design
following the stakeholder consultation. It shall reflect the responses to
CARs and CLs, the identification of FARs, and discussions on and
revisions to the project documentation;
c. All its applied approaches, findings and conclusions on the
requirements set out in sections above, including the Audit
Techniques Template, if applicable. The VVB may choose to use the
template even if not applicable;
d. A validation decision;
e. A list of interviewees (with name and general information if consent is
provided by interviewees^12 ).
f. Documents reviewed, sampling approaches used by the VVB and,
outline of on-site inspections. Where the VVB applied a sampling
approach to the on-site or remote inspection (as applicable), the VVB
```
(^12) If interviewee doesn’t provide consent to disclose the name in public document, the VVB
shall include an annex (separate document) with interviewees detail marked clearly that
document is confidential and shall not be made public.


```
shall include a description of how the sample size was determined and
how the field check/remote check was carried out;
g. Details of the validation team, technical experts and internal technical
reviewers involved, together with their roles in the validation activity
and, details of who conducted the on-site or remote inspection;
h. Information on quality control within the team and in the validation
process;
i. Appointment certificates or curriculum vitae of the VVB’s validation
team members, technical experts and internal technical reviewers for
the proposed project which are not part of the Gold Standard
Approved Auditor list at the time of start of the validation contract.
j. The VVB shall update the validation report according to any
corrections, changes, CARs, CLs, FARs, issued/requested by the Gold
Standard or done by the Project Developer(s) during the performance
certification process and ensure that the information and data
presented, especially on estimated SDG impacts, is aligned between
the PDD, Stakeholder Consultation Report, the SDG Impact tool, the
design review form, and the validation report.
```
**8| VALIDATION OF DESIGN CHANGE(S)**

### 8.1 | Corrections

8.1.1 | The VVB shall determine and state its decision on whether:

```
a. any corrections to project information or parameters fixed at
validation, as described in the registered PDD, comply with the
relevant requirements stated in Section 4 of Design Change
Requirements;
b. the Project Developer(s) have made corrections, whether the
corrected information is an accurate reflection of actual project
information; and/or the corrected parameters are in accordance with
applicable standard documents i.e., methodology(ies) or applicable
requirements.
```
8.1.2 | The VVB shall state how the corrected information accurately reflects the
actual project information and/or how the corrected parameters reflect the
application of the applied methodology(ies), the registered monitoring plan
and related documents.

### 8.2 | Changes to the start date of the crediting period

8.2.1 | The VVB shall determine and state its decision on whether the proposed
change in start date of crediting period complies with the relevant
requirements stated in Design Change Requirements.

### 8.3 | Update and/or permanent changes to registered monitoring plan

8.3.1 | The VVB shall determine and state its decision on whether:


```
a. there are permanent changes to the registered monitoring plan and
the monitoring permanently deviates from the applied
methodology(ies) (hence requiring revision of the methodology(ies)).
If there are, determine whether the permanent changes or deviation
comply with the relevant GS4GG requirements;
b. the permanent changes are in compliance with the applied
methodology(ies) and do not reduce the level of accuracy of the
monitoring compared with the requirements contained in the
registered monitoring plan;
c. the permanent changes or the permanent deviation of the monitoring
from the applied methodology(ies) are likely to lead to a reduction in
the accuracy of the calculation of emission reductions and SDG
Impacts. If the permanent changes or the permanent deviation will
lead to a reduction in the accuracy of the calculation, the VVB shall
request the Project Developer(s) to apply conservative assumptions
or discount factors to the calculations to the extent required to ensure
that emission reductions will not be over-estimated as a result of the
permanent change or the permanent deviation.
```
8.3.2 | The VVB shall state its decision on whether the permanent changes or the
permanent deviation comply with the relevant requirements stated in Design
Change Requirements.

### 8.4 | Changes to the project design................................................................

8.4.1 | The VVB shall determine and state its decision on whether:

```
a. there are proposed or actual changes to the project design of a
certified project, and, if there are, determine whether the changes
comply with the relevant requirements;
b. the description of changes in revised PDD accurately reflects the
implementation, operation and monitoring of the modified project by
review of the submitted revised PDD and by means of an on-site or
remote inspection (where conducted as per the GS4GG
requirements);
c. the impacts of the actual changes on the monitoring plan, the level of
accuracy of the monitoring activity, the applied methodology(ies) and
other requirements, as applicable;
d. the proposed or actual changes would adversely affect the conclusions
of the Validation Report of the registered PDD with regard to:
i. additionality of the project, applicability of the
methodology(ies) and applicable requirement documents with
which the project has been certified,
ii. compliance with the monitoring plan of applied
methodology(ies),
```

```
iii. level of accuracy and completeness in the monitoring of the
project compared with the requirements contained in the
registered monitoring plan,
iv. scale of the project,
v. Stakeholder Consultation,
vi. sustainable development impact assessment, including the
application of the GS4GG SDG Impact Tool,
vii. safeguarding assessment, and
viii. compliance with applicable legislation/host country
regulations
```
8.4.2 | If the proposed or actual changes affect the additionality of the certified
project, the VVB shall confirm whether:
a. If investment analysis was used to demonstrate additionality, the
Project Developer(s) have only modified the key parameters in the
original spreadsheet calculations affected by the proposed or actual
changes to the project;
b. If only barriers were claimed to demonstrate additionality, the Project
Developer have demonstrated that the barriers are still valid under
the new circumstances;
c. If the certified project uses an approved positive list or standardised
additionality and the proposed or actual changes affect the
additionality of the project, the project complies with the positive list
of the applied standardised baseline in the registered PDD.

8.4.3 | The VVB shall assess and state its decision on whether:

```
a. the revised PDD complies with all the requirements of the applied
methodologies, and all applicable regulatory documents;
b. if the applied methodology(ies) and/or standardised baselines have
been updated to the latest valid version, or changed to other
methodologies or standardised baselines, the VVB shall confirm that
the revised PDD meets all requirements of the updated/changed
methodologies, including the standards, methodological tools and
guidelines applied in accordance with the updated/changed
methodologies, and/or the updated/changed standardised baselines.
c. design change request is submitted within one year of the start date
of the proposed technology/measures (design change component).
```
8.4.4 | The VVB shall state its decision on:

```
a. the description of the proposed or actual changes as compared to the
description in the registered PDD;
b. an assessment on when the changes occurred, reasons for these
changes taking place, whether the changes would have been known
prior to the Design Certification of the project, how the changes would
```

```
impact on the overall operation/ability of the project to deliver
emission reductions and SDG Impacts as stated in the PDD, and
whether the revised estimation of emission reductions due to the
change takes into account the applicable limits in accordance with
GS4GG requirements and procedures;
c. an assessment regarding whether the changes would adversely affect
the conclusions of the Validation Report of the registered PDD with
regard to:
i. The applicability and application of:
a. the applied methodology(ies), the applied standardised
baselines and the other standard documents with which the
project has been certified;
b. the latest valid version of the applied methodology(ies), the
applied standardised baselines and/or the other standard
documents;
c. other methodology(ies) and/or standardised baselines that the
certified project has updated/changed to;
ii. The project boundary and any associated leakages due to the
changes;
iii. The compliance of the monitoring plan with the applied
methodology(ies), the applied standardised baselines and the
other standard documents;
iv. The level of accuracy of the monitoring compared with the
requirements contained in the registered monitoring plan;
v. The additionality of the certified project;
vi. The scale of the certified project.
vii. Stakeholder consultation
viii. Safeguarding assessment
ix. Sustainable development impact assessment
x. Compliance with applicable legislation
```
8.4.5 | In validating the revised PDD containing the proposed or actual changes, and
in preparing the opinion and decision, the VVB shall include information on
how:
a. the proposed revisions ensure that the level of accuracy and
completeness^13 in the monitoring and verification process is not
reduced as a result of the revision. The VVB shall, using objective
evidence, assess the accuracy and completeness of each proposed
revision to the registered monitoring plan, including the frequency of

(^13) Completeness refers to inclusion of all relevant information for assessment of GHG emissions
reductions and the information supporting the methods applied as required. For example, if the
VVB identifies an on-site generator for emergency use which was not included in the registered
monitoring plan during the verification process, the monitoring of fuel consumption of this
generator should be included in the monitoring plan via this procedure.


```
measurements, the quality of monitoring equipment (e.g., calibration
requirements, the quality assurance and quality control procedures);
b. the proposed revisions comply with all requirements of:
i. the applied methodology(ies), the applied standardised baselines
and the other standard documents;
ii. the updated/changed methodology(ies) including the standards,
methodological tools and guidelines applied in accordance with
the updated/changed methodology(ies), and/or the
updated/changed standardised baselines if updated to a later
valid version or changed to other methodology(ies) or
standardised baselines;
c. the findings from previous verification reports, if any, have been
taken into account
```
8.4.6 | If the proposed changes involve increase in the capacity specified in the
registered PDD, the VVB shall evaluate the impact of the capacity increase on
emission reductions and/or other certified impacts and define the limit up to
which the project may claim emission reductions and/or other certified
impacts in the future, according to the Design Change Requirements.

8.4.7 | In the case of permanent changes to a PoA/VPA, the VVB shall follow the
requirements stated in the above sections, however, the VVB shall be
required to assess the impact of these changes on both the PoA and the
VPA(s).

**9| VERIFICATION OF IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING**

### 9.1 | Objectives of verification

9.1.1 | The VVB shall conduct a thorough and independent assessment of the
implementation and the reported emission reductions, SDG Impacts,
stakeholder comments/feedback, if any and other monitored information e.g.,
safeguarding assessment by a design certified project against the applicable
GS4GG rules and requirements.

### 9.2 | Verification approach............................................................................

9.2.1 | The VVB shall determine the applicable regulatory documents for the project
being verified, including if there have been any changes to them that apply to
the project since the last assessment (validation or verification), and if any
deviations have been approved by Gold Standard or Gold Standard.

9.2.2 | Assess the claims and assumptions in the project’s mandatory documentation,
including (as applicable):
a. Monitoring report
b. Annual reports
c. Other relevant documentation e.g., Risks and Capacities


9.2.3 | The VVB shall assess both quantitative and qualitative information^14 on
emission reductions/GHG Removals and SDG Impacts provided in the project
documentation.

9.2.4 | The VVB shall assess and determine whether the implementation and
operation of the design certified project, and the steps taken to report
emission reductions/removals and other SDG Impacts comply with the
applicable regulatory documents. This assessment shall involve a review of
relevant documentation as well as on-site (mandatory for 1st verification) or
remote inspection(s), as applicable. For onsite inspection(s), the VVB may
apply a sampling approach in accordance with the latest version of the
“Standard: Sampling and surveys for CDM project activities and programme
of activities”.

9.2.5 | The VVB shall assess whether the data collection system meets the
requirements of the design certified monitoring plan as per the applied
methodology(ies) and related documents (if applicable), e.g., the SDG Impact
Tool.

9.2.6 | In addition to the monitoring documentation, the VVB shall review:

```
a. The design certified PDD and the Transition Annex (if applicable),
including the design certified monitoring plan and/or the changes
from the design certified PDD, and the corresponding validation
decision;
b. The Validation Report;
c. Previous Verification Reports, if any;
d. The applied methodologies, the applied standardised baselines and
the other applied methodological regulatory documents;
e. Any other information and references relevant to the emission
reductions/removals and SDG Impacts (e.g., IPCC reports, data on
electricity generation in the national grid or laboratory analysis and
national regulations).
f. The monitoring results of SDG Impact assessment of the deign
certified project;
g. The monitoring results of any safeguarding principles mitigation
measures included in the project’s monitoring plan or any changes to
validated assessment that has likely increased the risk of negative
impact
h. Design change and/or Deviation requests form, if any;
i. Any limits to emission reductions and/or other certified impacts the
project may claim, e.g., due to design changes in certified design.
```
(^14) Quantitative information comprises the reported numbers in the Monitoring Report.
Qualitative information comprises information on internal management controls, calculation
procedures, procedures for transfer of data, frequency of the monitoring reports, and review
and internal audit of calculations.


9.2.7 | In addition to reviewing the monitoring documentation, the VVB shall
determine whether the Project Developer(s) have addressed the FARs
identified during validation, design change, deviation requests, renewal of
crediting period or previous verification(s).

### 9.3 | Means of verification

```
a. General requirements
```
9.3.1 | Following Standard auditing techniques, the VVB shall assess the information
provided by the Project Developer(s).

9.3.2 | In assessing the information, the VVB shall apply the means of verification
specified throughout this standard and, where appropriate, standard auditing
techniques to assess the quality of the information, including but not limited
to:
a. Document review involving:
i. A review of the data and information presented to verify their
completeness;
ii. A review of the registered monitoring plan, the applied
methodologies, the applied standardised baselines and the
other applied methodological regulatory documents, paying
particular attention to the frequency of measurements, the
quality of metering equipment including calibration
requirements, and the quality assurance and quality control
procedures;
iii. An evaluation of data management and the quality assurance
and quality control system in the context of their influence on
the generation and reporting of GHG emission
reductions/removals and SDG Impacts;
b. On-site or remote inspection involving:
i. An assessment of the implementation and operation of the
registered project as per the registered PDD or any approved
revised PDD;
ii. A review of information flows for generating, aggregating and
reporting the monitoring parameters;
iii. Interviews with relevant personnel to determine whether the
operational and data collection procedures are implemented in
accordance with the registered monitoring plan;
iv. Cross checks between information provided in the monitoring
report and data from other sources such as plant logbooks,
inventories, purchase records, project/activity database, end
user survey records, HR records or similar data sources;
v. A check of the monitoring equipment (e.g., water testing kits,
water flow meters/sensors, electricity meters etc.) including
calibration performance and observations of monitoring


```
practices against the requirements of the PDD, the applied
methodologies, the applied standardised baselines and the
other applied methodological regulatory documents;
vi. A review of calculations and assumptions made in determining
the GHG data and emission reductions/removals and SDG
Impacts;
vii. An identification of quality control and quality assurance
procedures in place to prevent, or identify and correct, any
errors or omissions in the reported monitoring parameters
```
9.3.3 | Sampling approach in accordance with the “Standard: Sampling and surveys
for CDM project activities and programmes of activities”, including:
a. A random sampling for cases where the Project Developer did not
apply a sampling approach for monitoring.
b. An acceptance sampling or another sampling approach for cases
where the Project Developer applied a sampling approach for
monitoring.
c. The VVB may apply stricter sampling approaches based on project-
related risks.

9.3.4 | It is mandatory for the VVB to conduct an on-site inspection at verification for
the design certified project activity if:
a. It is the first verification for the VVB with regard to this project
activity;
b. More than three years have elapsed since the last on-site inspection
conducted for verification for the project activity.

9.3.5 | For cases that are not referred to in paragraph 9.3.4 | above, it is optional for
the VVB to conduct an on-site inspection at verification. If the VVB does not
conduct an on-site inspection as a means of verification, it shall describe the
alternative means e.g., remote audit^15 used and justify that they are sufficient
for the purpose of verification.

9.3.6 | Where no specific means of verification is specified, the VVB should apply the
standard auditing techniques described in paragraph 9.3.2 | above.

9.3.7 | The VVB shall document the Audit Techniques used for each aspect of the
project using any mandatory templates to document audit techniques, if
applicable to the project type being audited.
**b. Corrective Action Requests (CARs), Clarification Requests (CLs) and
Forward Action Requests (FARs) by the VVB**

9.3.8 | If the VVB identifies issues related to the monitoring, implementation and
operations of the registered project that could impair the capacity of the
project to achieve emission reductions and SDG Impacts or influence the
monitoring and reporting of emission reductions or removals, the VVB shall

(^15) Refer to Site Visit and Remote Audit Requirements and Procedures for detailed requirements.


```
ensure that these issues are accurately identified, formulated, discussed and
concluded in the verification report.
```
9.3.9 | The VVB shall raise a CAR if one of the following situations occur:

```
a. Non-compliance with the registered monitoring plan, the applied
methodologies, the applied standardised baselines or the other
applicable regulatory documents (including applicable templates and
procedures)is found in monitoring and reporting and has not been
sufficiently documented by the Project Developer(s), or if the
evidence provided to prove conformity is insufficient;
b. Modifications to the implementation, operation and monitoring of the
registered project has not been sufficiently documented by the Project
Developer(s);
c. Mistakes have been made in applying assumptions, data or
calculations of emission and SDG Impacts that will impact the
quantity of emission reductions and SDG Impacts;
d. Issues identified in a FAR during the Preliminary Review and
validation to be verified during the verification or the previous
verification(s) have not been resolved by the Project Developer(s).
```
9.3.10 | The VVB shall raise a CL if information is insufficient or not clear enough to
determine whether the applicable GS4GG requirements and procedures have
been met.

9.3.11 | The VVB shall raise a FAR during verification for actions if the monitoring and
reporting require attention and/or adjustment for the next verification period.

9.3.12 | The VVB shall resolve or “close out” CARs and CLs only if the Project
Developer(s) rectify the monitoring report or provides additional explanations
or evidence that satisfy the VVB’s concerns. If this is not done, the VVB shall
not submit a request for certification/issuance of emission reductions and SDG
Impacts.

9.3.13 | The VVB shall report on all CARs, CLs and FARs in its verification report. This
reporting shall explain the issue raised, the responses provided by the Project
Developer(s), the means of verification of such responses and references to
any resulting changes in the monitoring report or supporting annexes.
**c. Corrective Action Requests (CARs), Clarification Requests(CLs) and
Forward Action Requests (FARs) by the Gold Standard**

9.3.14 | Should the Gold Standard raise CARs, CLs, and/or FARs within the
Performance Review process:
a. For the Project Developer(s): the VVB shall assess how the Project
Developer(s) has addressed the CARs, CLs and/or FARs before the
response is sent to the Gold Standard. The verification report may
need to be updated accordingly to ensure that its final version reflects
accurately the characteristics and expected impact of the project.
b. For the VVB: the VVB shall address the CARs, CLs, and/or FARs before
the response is sent to the Gold Standard. The verification report shall


```
be updated accordingly to ensure that its final version reflects
accurately the characteristics and expected impact of the project.
```
### 9.4 | Verification of compliance

```
a. General requirements
```
9.4.1 | The VVB shall include in its verification report and certification report

```
a. a description of how it applied the methods/procedures for the
purpose of verification specified in the design certified DD.
b. a description of the on-site/remote inspection(s), where conducted in
accordance with relevant GS4GG requirements, and with the Audit
Techniques Template, if applicable.
```
9.4.2 | The VVB shall confirm that

```
a. monitoring periods have been consecutive.
b. monitoring reports have been submitted to the Gold Standard in a
consecutive manner, that is, when a monitoring report is being
submitted for a monitoring period, the VVB shall confirm that
monitoring reports for the previous monitoring periods have been
published.
```
9.4.3 | A request for issuance of GSVERs shall relate to the GSVERs design certified
project.
**b. Compliance of the monitoring report with the monitoring report form**

9.4.4 | The VVB shall:

```
a. determine whether the monitoring report was completed using the
valid version of the applicable Monitoring Report template and SDG
Impact tool.
b. shall state its opinion and decision on the compliance of the
monitoring report with the relevant template(s) and related manuals,
guidance and instructions.
c. Compliance of the project implementation with the design certified
PDD
```
9.4.5 | The VVB shall identify any concerns related to the conformity of the actual
project and its operation with the registered PDD and determine whether:
a. The implementation and operation of the project has been conducted
in accordance with the description contained in the design certified
DD; or
b. Any deviation and/or the proposed or actual design changes in the
implementation or operation of the project activity comply with the
Deviations Approval Requirements And Procedures and Design
Change Requirements respectively.

9.4.6 | By means of an on-site or remote inspection, the VVB shall assess that all
physical features (technology/measure, project equipment, and monitoring
and metering equipment) of the registered project specified in the design
certified PDD are in place and that the Project Developer(s) have operated the
project as per the design certified PDD or any approved revised PDD.


9.4.7 | For each monitoring period, the VVB shall report:

```
a. The implementation status of the design certified project.
i. For a project that consists of more than one site/facility, the
VVB shall describe the status of implementation and the
starting date of operation for each site/facility.
ii. For a project with phased implementation, the VVB shall state
the progress of the project achieved in each phase under
verification. If the phased implementation is delayed, the VVB
shall describe the reasons and present the expected
implementation dates;
b. The actual operation of the design certified project;
c. The information (data and variables) provided in the monitoring
report that is different from that stated in the design certified PDD or
any approved revised DD, and has caused an increase in the
estimates of emission reductions in the current monitoring period or is
highly likely to increase the estimates in the future monitoring
periods;^16
d. An opinion on the cause of any increase in the actual emission
reductions achieved by the registered non-LUF project in the current
monitoring period that was reported in monitoring report. The VVB
shall also identify if there is a systemic risk of over-issuance.^17
e. If any cap is established on SDG impacts after a design change,
deviation, grievance, or rule update, whether the claimed SDG
impacts are within the applicable cap.
f. For LUF projects, if there has been any shortfall in the project’s
performance, and if so, whether:
i. the shortfall is due to a reversal event that affects individual
Modelling Units or all modelling units
ii. the Project Developer has adjusted the CO2-fixation model
according to the Performance Shortfall Guidelines
iii. there are any PERs issued for which emission reductions have
not been realised for the monitoring period being assessed.
```
9.4.8 | The VVB shall assess and provide an opinion on whether the monitoring
report includes an update on stakeholder feedback received during the period
and suitability of any actions taken in response. It shall also review and
provide opinion on the relative successes and failures of the ongoing
stakeholder feedback mechanism and any proposals for improvement.

(^16) Discrepancies may include higher water availability than expected in the PDD, which may
increase the electricity output from a hydropower plant, or a higher plant load factor owing to
higher bagasse availability during the crushing season, which increases the production of
steam and electricity
(^17) Refer to guidance on Assessment Approach for Reporting Higher Ex-Post Emission
Reductions https://globalgoals.goldstandard.org/rc- 2022 - assessment-approach-for-projects-
overachieving-emission-reductions/


9.4.9 | The VVB shall assess and provide opinion on whether the grievance
mechanism was implemented in accordance with the design certified DD and
any feedback given by stakeholders as part of the project’s grievance
mechanism was recorded, suitably addressed and included in the MR.
**d. Compliance of the registered monitoring plan with applied
methodology(ies)**

9.4.10 | The VVB shall determine whether the registered monitoring plan is in
accordance with the applied methodology(ies) and related documents.

9.4.11 | For monitoring aspects that are not specified in the applied methodology(ies)
and related documents, particularly in the case of small-scale
methodology(ies) (e.g., additional monitoring parameters, monitoring
frequency and calibration frequency), the VVB should bring to the attention of
Gold Standard issues which may enhance the level of accuracy and
completeness of the registered monitoring plan.

9.4.12 | The VVB shall state whether the monitoring has been carried out in registered
monitoring plan.
**e. Compliance of monitoring activities with the registered monitoring
plan**

9.4.13 | The VVB shall determine whether the monitoring of parameters related to
emission reductions and SDG Impacts in the registered PDD has been
implemented in accordance with the registered monitoring plan.

9.4.14 | The VVB shall determine whether:

```
a. The registered monitoring plan has been properly implemented and
followed by the Project Developer(s);
b. All parameters stated in the registered monitoring plan have been
monitored and updated as applicable, including but not limited to:
i. Project emission or net removal parameters;
ii. Baseline emission or net removal parameters;
iii. Leakage parameters;
iv. Management and operational system: the responsibilities and
authorities for monitoring and reporting are in accordance with
the responsibilities and authorities stated in the registered
monitoring plan;
v. Mitigation measures resulting from the Safeguarding
Assessment and Stakeholder Consultation
vi. Indicators for the monitoring of other SDG impacts, including
baseline value, project value, and difference during the
monitoring period.
c. The equipment used for monitoring is in accordance with Section f
below and is controlled and calibrated in accordance with the
registered monitoring plan, the applied methodology(ies) and related
```

```
documents, GS TAC guidance, local/national standards, or as per the
manufacturer’s specification;
d. Monitoring results are consistently recorded as per the approved
frequency;
e. Quality assurance and quality control procedures have been applied in
accordance with the registered monitoring plan.
f. SDG impacts are clearly calculated per vintage and as difference from
the baseline. For A/R projects – using a pro-rata or specific approach.
```
9.4.15 | For a non-LUF registered project, if the Project Developer applied a sampling
approach to determine data and parameters monitored, the VVB shall assess
the compliance of the sampling efforts and surveys with the validated
sampling plan in accordance with the “Standard: Sampling and surveys for
CDM project activities and programmes of activities”.

9.4.16 | For a LUF registered project, if the Project Developer applied a sampling
approach to determine data and parameters monitored, the VVB shall assess
the appropriateness of the sampling efforts and surveys with the validated
sampling plan.

9.4.17 | The VVB shall

```
a. state whether the monitoring has been carried out in accordance with
the registered monitoring plan.
b. list each parameter required by the registered monitoring plan and
state how it verified the information flow (from data generation,
aggregation, to recording, calculation and reporting) for these
parameters including the values in the monitoring report.
f. Compliance with the calibration frequency requirements for
measuring instruments
```
9.4.18 | The VVB shall determine whether the calibration of the measuring equipment
that has an impact on the claimed emission reductions and SDG Impacts is
conducted by the Project Developer(s) at the frequency specified in the
applied methodologies and related documents or the registered monitoring
plan.

9.4.19 | If, during the verification of a certain monitoring period, the VVB identifies
that the calibration has been delayed and the calibration has been
implemented after the monitoring period in consideration (i.e., the results of
delayed calibration are available), referring to the illustrative examples in the
appendix below, the VVB may conclude its verification, provided the following
conservative approach is adopted in the calculation of emission reductions:
a. Applying the maximum permissible error^18 of the instrument to the
measured values taken during the period between the scheduled date
of calibration and the actual date of calibration, if the results of the
delayed calibration do not show any errors in the measuring

(^18) The maximum permissible errors of all the measuring instruments are specified by the
respective manufacturers as part of their technical specifications


```
equipment, or if the error is smaller than the maximum permissible
error; or
b. Applying the error identified in the delayed calibration test, if the
error is beyond the maximum permissible error of the measuring
equipment.
```
9.4.20 | The VVB shall confirm that the error has been applied:

```
a. In a conservative manner, such that the adjusted measured values of
the delayed calibration shall result in fewer claimed emission
reductions;
b. For all measured values taken during the period between the
scheduled date of calibration and the actual date of calibration.
```
9.4.21 | If the results of the delayed calibration are not available, or the calibration
has not been conducted at the time of the verification, the VVB, prior to
finalising the verification, shall request the Project Developer(s) to conduct
the required calibration and shall determine whether the Project Developer(s)
have calculated emission reductions conservatively using the approach
mentioned in paragraph 9.4.19 | above.

9.4.22 | If the VVB determines that it is not possible for the Project Developer(s) to
conduct the calibration at the frequency specified in the applied
methodology(ies) and related documents, guidance provide by Gold Standard,
or the registered monitoring plan due to reasons beyond the control of the
Project Developer(s)^19 , the VVB shall follow the applicable requirements
related to design changes in section 8| above.

9.4.23 | If neither the applied methodologies and related documents, nor the
registered monitoring plan specify any requirements for calibration frequency
for the measuring equipment, the VVB shall determine whether the
equipment is calibrated either in accordance with the specifications of the
local/national standards, or as per the manufacturer’s specification. If neither
local/national standards nor the manufacturer’s specification is available, the
VVB shall determine whether the equipment is calibrated in accordance with
the specifications of the international standards.

9.4.24 | The VVB shall report whether the calibration of the measuring equipment that
has an impact on the claimed emission reductions is conducted at the
frequency specified in the applied methodologies and related documents or
the registered monitoring plan.
**g. Assessment of data and calculation of emission reductions and SDG
Impacts**

9.4.25 | The VVB shall assess the data and calculations of emission reductions and
SDG Impacts achieved by the registered project.

9.4.26 | The VVB shall determine whether:

(^19) For example, due to the contractual terms between the Project Developer(s) and
purchasing/selling entities.


```
a. A complete set of data for the specified monitoring period is available.
If only partial data are available because activity levels or non-activity
parameters have not been monitored in accordance with the
registered monitoring plan, the VVB shall assess whether:
i. The most conservative values approach is applied to the
parameters for the entire non-monitoring period in accordance
with the provisions relating to deviation from the registered
monitoring plan, the applied methodology(ies) or the applied
standardised baselines in the Deviations Approval
Requirements And Procedures
ii. Alternative monitoring arrangements for the non-monitoring
period are described, whether they apply conservative
assumptions or discount factors to the calculations, and
whether the alterative monitoring arrangements have been
approved by the Gold Standard, either under the prior-approval
track or to be approved under the issuance track relating to
temporary deviation from the registered monitoring plan, the
applied methodologies or the applied standardised baselines in
the Deviations Approval Requirements And Procedures
b. The information provided in the monitoring report has been cross-
checked with other sources such as plant logbooks, inventories,
purchase records, project/activity database, end user survey records,
HR records and laboratory analysis;
c. The calculations of baseline emissions, project emissions, and leakage
emissions have been carried out in accordance with the formulae and
methods described in the registered monitoring plan, the applied
methodologies and related documents;
d. Any assumptions used in emission or removal, or other SDG impact
calculations have been justified;
e. Appropriate emission factors, IPCC default values, GWPs and other
reference values have been correctly applied;
f. The monitoring results are presented in the monitoring report
separately for
i. Each vintage, and
ii. the period up to 31 December 2020 and the period from 1
January 2021, if the monitoring period starts before 1 January
2021 and ends any time thereafter.
```
9.4.27 | The VVB shall provide:

```
a. An indication of whether a complete set of data for the monitoring
period was not available because activity levels or non-activity
parameters were not monitored in accordance with the registered
monitoring plan, and if so, whether the most conservative values
were applied, or alternative monitoring arrangements were proposed
or have been approved by Gold Standard;
```

```
b. A description of how the VVB cross-checked monitored and reported
data;
c. A confirmation that appropriate methods and formulae for calculating
baseline, project and leakage emissions have been followed;
d. An opinion on whether assumptions, emission factors and default
values that were applied in the calculations have been justified;
e. A confirmation that the pro-rata approach or the specific approach for
A/R project activities was correctly applied to the calculations of GHG
emission reductions or net anthropogenic GHG removals, where
applicable;
f. A confirmation that the first day in which GSVERs/emission reductions
and SDG Impacts are being claimed has been correctly specified,
where applicable.
```
9.4.28 | The VVB shall determine whether the registered small-scale/micro-scale
project remains within the limit of the type of small-scale/micro-scale projects
defined in the GHG Emissions Reductions & Sequestration Product
Requirements. If the project exceeds the limit of its type in any year of the
crediting period, the VVB shall assess whether this was caused by design
changes validated in accordance with relevant requirements in section 8|
above. If the VVB determines that there are no such design changes to the
project, and therefore the scale of the project activity does not change, it
shall assess whether the calculated emission reductions during this particular
year were capped at the amount calculated with the limit of its type.
**h. Specific requirements for bundled projects**

9.4.29 | For bundled registered small-scale projects, the VVB shall:

```
a. Determine whether the bundle of design certified small-scale projects
were implemented and monitored;
b. Determine whether any project activities in the bundle have been
taken out of or added to the bundle since the registration;
c. The VVB shall determine whether each sub-bundle of the design
certified bundle of small-scale project remains within the limit of the
type of small-scale projects defined in the GHG Emissions Reductions
& Sequestration Product Requirements. If the VVB determines that
the sub-bundle goes beyond its type, it shall assess whether the
calculated emission reductions during this particular year were capped
at the amount calculated with the limit of its type;
d. Prepare a single verification report for a design certified bundle of
small-scale projects if a single DD was prepared for the registration. If
separate DDs were prepared for each project in the bundle for the
registration, the VVB may choose to prepare a single Verification
Report, addressing each project in the bundle separately but with the
same monitoring period in the report, or separate Verification
Reports, each corresponding to each DD.
```

### 9.5 | Quality of evidence

9.5.1 | When verifying the reported emission reductions/removals and SDG Impacts,
the VVB shall confirm that there is an audit trail that contains the evidence
and records that validate or invalidate the stated figures. It shall include the
source documents that form the basis for assumptions and other information
underlying the emission reductions and SDG Impacts data.

9.5.2 | When assessing the audit trail, the VVB shall:

```
a. Address whether there is sufficient evidence available, both in terms
of frequency (time period between evidence) and coverage (in
covering the full monitoring period);
b. Address the source and nature of the evidence (external or internal,
oral or documented);
c. Cross-check the monitoring report against other sources such as
comparable information, where available, from sources other than
those used in the monitoring report to determine whether the stated
figures are correct.
```
9.5.3 | The VVB shall only certify emission reductions/removals and SDG Impacts
that are based on verifiable evidence.

### 9.6 | Application of materiality

```
a. General requirements
```
9.6.1 | The concept of materiality is applicable to the verification of all types of
design certified project activities. It is not applicable to:
a. Uncertainties related to measurement;
b. Addressing temporary deviations and permanent changes to the
registered monitoring plan, the applied methodologies or the applied
standardised baselines, regardless of whether corresponding GHG
emission reductions or net anthropogenic GHG removals are above or
below materiality thresholds.

9.6.2 | A VVB planning and conducting verification using the concept of materiality
shall achieve a reasonable level of assurance^20 that the reported emission
reductions/removals are free from material errors, omissions or
misstatements in accordance with the requirements below.^21

9.6.3 | An omission, misstatement, or erroneous reporting of information is material
if it might lead, at an aggregated level, to an overestimation of the total
emission reductions/removals achieved by a registered project equal to or
higher than the following thresholds:

(^20) Defined as the level of assurance where the nature and extent of the verification activities
have been designed to provide a high but not absolute level of assurance on historical data
and information
(^21) For additional guidance and examples of the application of materiality in the verification,
refer to the “Guideline: Application of materiality in verifications”.


```
a. 0.5 per cent of the emission reductions/removals for project achieving
a total emission reduction equal to or more than 500,000 tonnes of
carbon dioxide equivalent per year^22 ;
b. 1 per cent of the emission reductions/removals for projects achieving
a total emission reduction between 300,000 and 500,000 tonnes of
carbon dioxide equivalent per year;
c. 2 per cent of the emission reductions/removals for large-scale project
activities achieving a total emission reduction of 300,000 tonnes of
carbon dioxide equivalent per year or less;
d. 10 per cent of the emission reductions/removals for microscale
projects.
```
9.6.4 | Recognising that circumstances may exist that could cause the information
reported by Project Developer(s) to be materially misstated, the VVB should
plan and perform verifications with an attitude of professional skepticism and
rely on its professional judgement when applying the concept of materiality.

9.6.5 | The application of the concept of materiality and reasonable level of assurance
imply that some data or information may not be checked. However, the VVB
should design its verification and sampling plans to detect all material errors,
omissions or misstatements, and any unchecked data or information should
not contain any material errors, omissions or misstatements. A VVB’s
verification decision applies to 100 per cent of the data and information, even
if the VVB may not have checked the entire data set and information.

9.6.6 | Applying the concept of materiality does not mean that identified errors are
not corrected; if an error, omission or misstatement is identified by the VVB,
regardless of whether it is material or not, the VVB shall request Project
Developer(s) to address it.
**b. Consideration of materiality in planning verification**

9.6.7 | The VVB should:

```
a. identify the materiality threshold referred to in paragraph 9.6.3
|above that corresponds to the amount of emission
reductions/removals that the specific design certified project will
achieve;
b. understand the environment in which the registered project operates,
the sources of project emissions within the project boundary and the
leakage, the monitoring activities, the equipment used to monitor or
measure activity data, the origin and application of data used to
calculate or measure the emissions, data flow, the internal quality
control system, and the overall organisation with respect to
monitoring and reporting;^23
```
(^22) A year refers to a period of 12 consecutive months.
(^23) Adapted from European Union. 2007. Commission Decision of 18 July 2007 establishing
guidelines for the monitoring and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to Directive
2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council.


```
c. conduct a risk assessment to identify and assess the risks of
individual or aggregated material errors, omissions or misstatements
that may occur within the threshold based on elements in
subparagraphs (a) and (b) above;
d. design verification plans, audit procedures^24 and sampling plans
whose type, timing^25 and extent are based on and are responsive to
the assessed risks of material errors, omissions or misstatements
```
9.6.8 | The materiality thresholds apply to the total emission reductions actually
achieved. When planning verification, the VVB should apply the applicable
materiality threshold to the reported total emission reductions. If, as a result
of the verification, the initial reported total emission reductions are revised,
the VVB should reapply the materiality threshold to the revised total emission
reductions and, if needed, make adjustments to its verification plans and
sampling plans.
**c. Consideration of materiality in conducting verification**

9.6.9 | The VVB should:

```
a. apply verification plans, audit procedures and sampling plans;
b. assess potential errors, omissions and misstatements against the
materiality threshold to determine whether they are material
individually or in aggregate and whether further audit procedures are
needed.
```
9.6.10 | If an error, omission or misstatement is detected, the VVB should be aware
that it may not be an isolated occurrence and may be a systemic reoccurring
error. For example, other errors may exist if the VVB identifies that the error,
omission or misstatement arose from a breakdown in the Project Developer’s
internal quality control and quality assurance system.

9.6.11 | If an immaterial error, omission or misstatement is detected, the VVB shall
request the Project Developer(s) to address it and should determine whether
additional audit procedures should be conducted in order to reach a
reasonable level of assurance that the claimed emission reductions are free
from material error, omission or misstatement.

9.6.12 | If a material error, omission or misstatement is detected, the VVB may,
depending on the circumstances of the error, immediately request Project
Developer to address it or conduct additional audit procedures to confirm or
determine the context and magnitude of the error, omission or misstatement
and then shall request Project Developer(s) to address it.

9.6.13 | If further audit procedures are necessary, the VVB may consider whether the
overall verification plans and sampling plans need to be revised.

(^24) As per the section 9.3 ‘Means of verification’.
(^25) For example, timing may refer to the specific time intervals for which the VVB may draw its
samples.


### 9.7 | Verification report

9.7.1 | The verification Report shall give an overview of the verification process used
by the VVB in order to arrive at its verification conclusions. All verification
findings shall be identified and justified.

9.7.2 | The VVB shall report the following:

```
a. A summary of the verification process, the scope of verification and
the conclusion;
b. Details of the verification team, technical experts, internal reviewers
involved, together with their roles in the verification activity and,
details of who conducted the on-site/remote inspection;
c. Documents reviewed
d. Findings of the desk review and, on-site/remote inspection and
sampling approach used by the VVB. Where the VVB applied a
sampling approach to the on-site/remote inspection, the VVB shall
include a description of how the sample size was determined and how
the field/remote check was carried out;
e. A list of interviewees (with name and general information if consent is
provided by interviewees^26 ).
f. All its applied approaches, findings and conclusions on requirements
set out in section 9.4 | above, including the Audit Techniques
Template, if applicable. The VVB may choose to use the template
even if not applicable;
g. A list of each parameter specified by the registered monitoring plan
and a statement on how the values in the monitoring report have
been verified;
h. A statement on whether any design changes to the registered PDD
have been approved by Gold Standard/GS TAC or whether any design
changes will be/have been submitted together with the request for
issuance of VERs;
i. An assessment and close-out of any CARs, CLs or FARs issued to the
Project Developer(s);
j. An assessment of remaining issues from the previous verification
period, if appropriate;
k. An assessment of the presence and suitability of the grievance
mechanism;
l. Information on quality control within the team and in the verification
process;
m. Appointment certificates or curricula vitae of the VVB’s verification
team members, technical experts and internal technical reviewers for
```
(^26) If interviewee doesn’t provide consent to disclose the name in public document, the VVB
shall include an annex (separate document) with interviewees detail marked clearly that
document is confidential and shall not be made public.


```
the proposed project which are not part of the Gold Standard
Approved Auditor list at the time of start of the validation contract.
n. A conclusion on the verified amount of emission reductions and SDG
Impacts achieved.
o. A summary of SDG impacts and any products being sought per
vintage and as difference from the baseline. For A/R projects – using
a pro-rata or specific approach.
```
9.7.3 | Where the VVB applied the concept of materiality in planning and conducting
verification for the registered project in accordance with section 9.6 | above,
it shall report:
a. The risks, the risk assessment undertaken and how the verification
plans and sampling plans were designed to respond to these risks and
ensure that all material errors, omissions or misstatements were
detected;
b. Whether and how the verification plans and sampling plans were
revised to take into account the need for further audit procedures due
to the nature/type of errors, omissions or misstatements detected;
c. How the concept of materiality was applied in determining whether a
detected error, omission or misstatement was material or immaterial
either individually or in aggregate.

9.7.4 | The VVB shall describe all documentation supporting the verification and
make it available on request.

9.7.5 | The VVB shall, based on its verification, certify in writing that, during the
specified monitoring period, the registered project achieved the verified
amount of emission reductions that would not have occurred in the absence of
the project.

9.7.6 | The VVB shall update the verification report according to any corrections,
changes, CARs, CLs, FARs, issued/requested by the Gold Standard or done by
the Project Developer(s) during the performance certification process and
ensure that the information and data presented, especially on SDG impacts, is
aligned between the monitoring report, the SDG Impact Tool, the
performance review form, and the verification report.

**10| VALIDATION FOR DESIGN CERTIFICATION RENEWAL**

10.1.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the Project Developer(s) have updated
sections of the PDD in response to the following aspects (as applicable):
a. Changes in the project as related to the General Eligibility Criteria
b. Any relevant updates to the GS4GG rules and requirements
c. Any relevant updates to the Gold Standard activity, product and
methodology-specific requirements
d. Any relevant updates to obligatory templates and tools that apply to
the project


```
e. Re-definition of the Baseline Scenario (including ex-ante parameters)
and any impact of change on the Eligibility Principles, Criteria and
requirements
f. Demonstration of Ongoing Financial Need, where relevant (please
refer to Ongoing Financial Need section in Principles and
Requirements)
```
10.1.2 | The VVB shall apply the requirements in section 6.3 | above mutatis mutandis
to validate the information provided by the Project Developer(s).

10.1.3 | If the Project Developer(s) used a later valid version of the PDD template for
the updated DD than the version of the template of the registered DD, the
VVB shall determine whether the information transferred to the later valid
version of the PDD template is materially the same as that in the design
certified PDD.

10.1.4 | The VVB shall assess the validity of the original baseline(s) (if applicable) or
its update through an assessment of the following issues:
a. The impact of new relevant national and/or sectoral policies and
circumstances on the baseline(s), taking into account relevant GS
guidance (as available) at the time of requesting design certification
renewal of the project^27 ;
b. The correctness of the application of the approved methodologies and,
where applicable, the approved standardised baselines and the other
methodological regulatory documents for the determination of the
continued validity of the baseline(s) or its update, and the estimation
of emission reductions and SDG Impacts for the applicable crediting
period of the registered project.
c. If data and parameters used for determining the original baseline(s),
that were determined ex-ante and not monitored during the crediting
period, are no longer valid, the Project Developer(s) has suitably
updated such data and parameters^28.

10.1.5 | If the Project Developer(s) selected another methodology(ies),
methodological tool and/or standardised baseline for the purpose of design
certification renewal of the registered project due to the inapplicability of the
valid version of the methodology(ies) (including a consolidated methodology
thereof), methodological tool and/or standardised baseline applied to the
design certified DD, the VVB shall assess whether the updated DD complies
with all the requirements of the selected methodology, methodological tool
and/or standardised baseline except for additionality demonstration.

10.1.6 | The VVB shall assess whether the Project Developer have provided all
information to demonstrate Ongoing Financial Need (OFN) for those projects

(^27) This requirement shall not apply to a registered project using the valid version of an
applicable approved CDM standardised baseline that standardizes the baseline scenario.
(^28) For updating relevant data and parameters, the Project Developer may use the
Methodological tool: Assessment of the validity of the original/current baseline and update of
the baseline at the renewal of the crediting period.


```
that are required to demonstrate financial additionality as per the relevant
requirements set out in paragraphs 4.1.51 to 4.1.53 of Principles and
Requirements. The VVB shall assess the accuracy and suitability of the
provided information and, upon its review, furnish their opinion on whether
the finances derived from Gold Standard Certification are material to the
ongoing sustainability of the registered project^29.
```
10.1.7 | The VVB shall request the Project Developer(s) to provide an updated DD
prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Template Guide.

10.1.8 | The VVB shall prepare a Validation Report for design certification renewal of
the registered project.

10.1.9 | In its Validation Report for design certification renewal of the registered
project, the VVB shall:

```
a. Provide all its applied approaches, findings and conclusions on
whether:
```
```
i. The updated PDD has been completed using the valid version of
the applicable PDD template, following the instructions in the
Template Guide;
ii. The information transferred to the later valid version of the
PDD form is materially the same as that in the design certified
PDD, where applicable;
```
```
iii. The methodologies and, where applicable, the standardised
baselines and the other methodological regulatory documents
were applied in accordance with the applicable GS4GG
requirements;
iv. The baseline, the estimated emission reductions, SDG Impacts
and the monitoring plan in the updated PDD comply with the
applicable GS4GG requirements, and the valid version of the
methodologies and, where applicable, the standardised
baselines and the other methodological regulatory documents
that are applied in the updated PDD;
```
```
v. The demonstration of Ongoing Financial Need (OFN) is as per
the relevant requirements set out in paragraphs 4.1.51 to
4.1.53 of Principles and Requirements;
```
```
vi. The next crediting period of the project activity commences on
the day immediately after the expiration of the current
crediting period, or at a later date, e.g., due to delay in
validation;
```
(^29) Although the submission of the information to demonstrate OFN is mandatory, this
information will not be used for formal decision making to decide whether a project shall renew
or not.


b. Report on all items listed in paragraph 7.16.6 | above except
paragraph 7.16.6 | (c) above;

c. Include the Audit Techniques template, if applicable to the project
type being assessed. The VVB may choose to use the template even if
not applicable.

d. Follow paragraphs 7.16.1 | to 7.16.4 | above mutatis mutandis on its
validation opinion;

**E.** the VVB shall update the validation report according to any
corrections, changes, CARs, CLs, FARs, issued/requested by the Gold
Standard or done by the Project Developer during the design
certification renewal process and ensure that the information and data
presented, especially on SDG impacts, is aligned between the PDD,
the SDG Impact Tool, the design review form, and the validation
report.


## VOLUNTARY PROJECT ACTIVITIES (VPAS) SECTION C: PROGRAMME OF ACTIVITIES (POAS) AND REAL CASE

# CASE VOLUNTARY PROJECT ACTIVITIES (VPAS)

For overarching/general validation and verification requirements (applicable to both
standalone projects and PoAs/VPAs), please refer to relevant sections of Section A and
Section B above. The below section presents additional requirement applicable to and
contains specific requirements for PoA/VPAs only.

## 11| VALIDATION OF THE POA

### 11.1 | Type and Scale.................................................................................

11.1.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the type and scale of proposed PoA is
correctly identified and is in accordance with the Programme of Activity
Requirements and Procedures.

### 11.2 | Purpose and general description of PoA

11.2.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the description of the proposed PoA in the
POA-DD is accurate, complete, and provides an understanding of the PoA and
is in accordance with the Programme of Activity Requirements and
Procedures.

11.2.2 | The VVB shall determine whether the PoA and its VPAs (real or regular) IDs
are defined in in accordance with the Programme of Activity Requirements
and Procedures.

11.2.3 | The VVB shall assess the POA-DD submitted by the Coordinating and
Managing Entity (CME) and shall confirm:
a. Policy/measure or stated goal that the PoA seeks to promote;
b. The framework developed for the implementation of the proposed PoA
and inclusion of VPAs in the PoA;
c. That the PoA is a voluntary action by the Coordinating and Managing
Entity.

11.2.4 | The VVB shall assess the boundary of the proposed PoA in terms of
geographical area (e.g., municipality, region within a country, country or
several countries) within which all VPAs to be included in the PoA will be
implemented.

11.2.5 | The VVB shall determine whether, in establishing the boundary of the
proposed PoA, the CME has taken into consideration all applicable national
and/or sectoral policies and regulations within the chosen boundary.

11.2.6 | The VVB shall:

```
a. Describe the process undertaken to validate the accuracy and
completeness of the description in the POA-DD;
b. State its opinion on the accuracy and completeness of the description
in the POA-DD.
```

### 11.3 | Management system

11.3.1 | The VVB shall assess and state its opinion on whether the operational and
management system described in the POA-DD is in accordance with the
GS4GG “Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures’’.

### 11.4 | Demonstration of additionality of PoA

11.4.1 | The VVB shall assess and state its opinion on whether the additionality of the
proposed PoA was demonstrated in accordance with the “Programme of
Activity Requirements and Procedures’’.

11.4.2 | The VVB shall assess the applicability of prior consideration requirement and
determine the validity of evidence presented for demonstration of prior
consideration as per the requirements described in section **Error! Reference
source not found.**.

### 11.5 | Start date and duration of PoA

11.5.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the start date and duration of a proposed
PoA comply with the relevant provisions in the “Programme of Activity
Requirements and Procedures’’.

### 11.6 | Stakeholder consultation

11.6.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the PoA design consultation was carried in
accordance with the relevant requirements in the “Stakeholder Consultation
and Engagement Requirements”.

11.6.2 | The VVB shall determine whether changes to the POA-DD are made after the
PoA design consultation. If the VVB identifies such changes, it shall assess
whether:
a. The comments received through the PoA design consultation are still
valid;
b. The scope of the stakeholders engaged is still valid.

11.6.3 | If significant changes to the PoA design occurs after the PoA design
consultation, the VVB shall determine whether a new PoA design consultation
was conducted with relevant stakeholders in accordance with “Stakeholder
Consultation & Engagement Requirements”.

11.6.4 | The VVB shall:

```
a. Describe the steps taken to assess the adequacy of the PoA design
consultation;
b. State its opinion on the adequacy of the PoA design consultation.
```
### 11.7 | Approval and Authorisation

11.7.1 | Refer to section 7.11 | above.

### 11.8 | Application of baseline and monitoring methodology(ies)

11.8.1 | The VVB shall determine whether

```
a. CME has included the selected methodologies and or combination of
methodologies, references (titles, versions, and reference numbers)
```

```
of the selected methodology(ies) in accordance with the “Programme
of Activity Requirements and Procedures’’;
b. CME has correctly applied the selected methodology(ies) as per the
scale of the proposed PoA and its VPAs;
c. CME has included summary of eligible technology(ies)/measures the
selected methodology(ies) is applied to as per the justification
included in real case VPA-DD.
```
11.8.2 | The VVB shall confirm that a real case VPA has been prepared and submitted
for each technology/measure, each methodology(ies) and each combination
thereof, or that technologies/measures included in the PoA in accordance with
the “Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”.

11.8.3 | The VVB shall validate and state its opinion

```
a. identified cross effects where multiple methodologies are applied, and
b. If cross effects exist, CME has taken them into account in the
calculation of GHG emission reductions or removals in accordance
with the “Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”
```
### 11.9 | Eligibility and inclusion criteria

11.9.1 | The VVB shall determine whether eligibility criteria for inclusion of real case
and its regular VPAs in the PoA are defined in accordance with the
“Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”.

**12| VALIDATION OF THE REAL CASE VPA(s)**

### 12.1 | Type and scale

12.1.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the type and scale of each real case VPA(s)
is correctly identified and is in accordance with the “Programme of Activity
Requirements and Procedures’’.

### 12.2 | Description of real case VPA(s)

12.2.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the description of the real case VPA(s) in is
accurate, complete, and provides an understanding of real case VPA(s).

12.2.2 | The VVB shall assess the real case VPA and shall confirm that proposed real
case VPA has
a. Only one host Party;
b. Its geographic reference or other means of identification;
c. A VPA implementer(s),
d. An entity(ies)/individual(s) responsible for its operation;
e. Been neither registered as a project activity nor included in another
registered PoA.

12.2.3 | The VVB shall assess the real case VPA as per the requirements, as
applicable, described in section 7.2 | above.

12.2.4 | The VVB shall:


```
a. Describe the process undertaken to validate the accuracy and
completeness of the description of the real case VPA(s);
b. Provide an opinion on the accuracy and completeness of the real case
VPA(s) description.
```
12.2.5 | The VVB shall determine whether the real case VPA-DD defined the inclusion
criteria for its regular case VPA for inclusion in the PoA.

12.2.6 | The VVB shall assess

```
a. how each condition, if any, pertaining to general description at regular
VPA(s) level, is defined in accordance with the applicable
requirements in the “Programme of Activity Requirements and
Procedures”, and
b. is verifiable as well as sufficiently objective and comprehensive to
permit the assessment of the inclusion of corresponding regular VPAs
in the PoA.
```
### 12.3 | Demonstration of additionality

12.3.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the proposed project is additional as
demonstrated in the VPA-DD in accordance with “Programme of Activity
Requirements and Procedures’’.

12.3.2 | The VVB shall assess additionality demonstration for the real case VPA as per
requirements described in section 7.3 | above.

12.3.3 | The VVB shall determine whether the real case VPA-DD defined the inclusion
criteria for its regular case VPAs to systematically demonstrate additionality at
regular VPA level.

12.3.4 | The VVB shall assess

```
a. how each condition pertaining to the demonstration of additionality at
regular VPA(s) level, is defined in accordance with the applicable
requirements in the “Programme of Activity Requirements and
Procedures”, and
b. is verifiable as well as sufficiently objective and comprehensive to
permit the assessment of the inclusion of corresponding regular VPAs
in the PoA.
```
### 12.4 | Demonstration of prior consideration

12.4.1 | If the stakeholder consultation for the real case VPA was conducted after the
start date of the VPA i.e., retroactive VPA or prior consideration justification is
required as per activity requirements, the VVB shall determine whether
revenue from carbon credits were considered necessary in the decision to
undertake the VPA as a proposed activity.

12.4.2 | The VVB shall assess the applicability of prior consideration requirement to
proposed real case VPA(s)and determine the validity of evidence presented
for demonstration of prior consideration as per the requirements described in
section **Error! Reference source not found.**


### 12.5 | Start date, duration and crediting period...............................................

12.5.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the Coordinating and Managing Entity
specified the following in accordance with relevant requirements in the
“Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”:
a. Start date of the proposed real case VPA;
b. Start date of the crediting period of the proposed real case VPA;
c. Expected operational lifetime;
d. Type and duration of the crediting period;

12.5.2 | The VVB shall assess the above information following the requirements
described in para 7.6.2 | above. The VVB shall also provide its opinion on the
retroactive crediting (if applicable).

12.5.3 | The VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess and state its opinion on the
compliance of start date and crediting period type and duration specified in
the VPA-DD with “Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”.

### 12.6 | Safeguarding Assessment

12.6.1 | The VVB shall determine and assess the compliance of proposed real case
VPA(s) with Safeguarding Principles and Requirements following the
requirements described in section 7.7 | above.

12.6.2 | The VVB shall

```
a. determine applicability of options selected in real case VPA-DD for
safeguarding assessment for regular VPAs in compliance with the
“Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”.
b. assess whether the real case VPA-DD defines the inclusion criteria,
applicability conditions and requirements including evidence and
justifications provided for selected options, correctly for demonstration
of compliance with Safeguarding Principles and Requirements at regular
VPA level.
```
12.6.3 | The VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess and state its opinion on the
compliance with Safeguarding Principles and Requirements following
“Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”.

### 12.7 | Gender Sensitivity Assessment

12.7.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the proposed real case VPA(s) has

```
a. demonstrated compliance with the mandatory requirements as
outlined in Gender Equality Requirements & Guidelines.
b. described the inclusion criteria for Gender Equality Requirements &
Guidelines for its regular VPA(s).
```
### 12.8 | Contributions to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

12.8.1 | The VVB shall determine and assess the compliance of proposed real case
VPA(s) pertaining to SDGs impact assessment following the requirements
described in section 7.9 | above.

12.8.2 | The VVB shall


```
a. determine applicability of options selected in real case VPA-DD for SDG
impact assessment for regular VPA(s) as per “Programme of Activity
Requirements and Procedures.
b. assess whether the real case VPA-DD defines the inclusion criteria,
applicability conditions and requirements including evidence and
justifications provided for selected options, correctly for demonstration
of compliance with Programme of Activity Requirements and
Procedures at regular VPA level.
```
12.8.3 | The VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess and state its opinion on the
compliance with SDG impact assessment requirement following the
“Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”.

### 12.9 | Stakeholder consultation

12.9.1 | The VVB shall determine and assess the compliance of proposed real case
VPA(s) pertaining to stakeholder consultation following the requirements
described in section 7.10 | and Stakeholder Consultation and Engagement
Requirements.

12.9.2 | The VVB shall

```
a. determine applicability of options selected in real case VPA-DD for
stakeholder consultation as regular VPA(s) level as per “Programme of
Activity Requirements and Procedures”.
b. assess whether the real case VPA-DD defines the inclusion criteria,
applicability conditions and requirements including evidence and
justifications provided for selected options, correctly for demonstration
of compliance with Stakeholder Consultation and Engagement
Requirements at regular VPA level.
```
12.9.3 | The VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess and state its opinion on the
compliance with Stakeholder Consultation and Engagement Requirements as
per the “Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”.

### 12.10 | Approval and authorisation

12.10.1 | Refer to section 7.11 | above.

### 12.11 | Application of baseline and monitoring methodology(ies)

```
a. General requirements
```
12.11.1 | The VVB shall determine the validity and assess the applicability of selected
methodology(ies) to real case VPA as per the requirements described in
section 7.12 | a above and “Programme of Activity Requirements and
Procedures”.

12.11.2 | The VVB shall determine the validity of criteria and justifications provided in
real case VPA-DD to demonstrate applicability of the selected
methodology(ies) at its regular VPA(s).

12.11.3 | The VVB shall assess and state its opinion on whether the methodologies
were applied in accordance with the “Programme of Activity Requirements and
Procedures ’’.


```
b. VPA boundary, sources and greenhouse gases (GHGs)
```
12.11.4 | The VVB shall determine the validity of real case VPA boundary, sources and
GHGs as per the requirements described in section 7.12 | b above and
“Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures ”.

12.11.5 | The VVB shall determine whether the inclusion criteria and description of
how to define the VPA boundary of each of the corresponding regular VPA(s),
including which sources and GHGs are to be included in the VPA boundary
under which conditions or circumstances is in accordance with the applied
methodologies and the applied standardised baselines.

12.11.6 | The VVB shall state whether the description of how to define VPA boundary
of each of the corresponding regular VPAs and the selected sources and gases
are justified for the proposed real case VPAs. Should the VVB identify
emission sources that will be affected by the implementation of corresponding
VPAs, and which are expected to contribute more than 1 per cent of the
overall expected average annual GHG emission reductions or net
anthropogenic GHG removals, and are not addressed by the applied
methodologies or the applied standardised baselines, the VVB shall request a
clarification of, revision to, or deviation from the methodologies or the
standardised baselines, as appropriate.

### 12.12 | Baseline scenario

12.12.1 | The VVB shall determine the whether real case VPA-DD complies with the
requirements pertaining to the baseline scenario as described in the section
7.13 | above and “Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”.

12.12.2 | The VVB shall determine whether the inclusion criteria and description of
how to establish the baseline scenario for each of the corresponding regular
VPAs is in accordance with the applied methodologies.

12.12.3 | The VVB shall determine whether the real case VPA-DD provides a
description of the technology that would be employed and/or the activities
that would take place in the absence of each of the regular VPAs or an
approach how to determine at regular VPAs.

### 12.13 | Estimation of emission reductions or net anthropogenic removals..............

12.13.1 | The VVB shall determine whether real case VPA-DD complies with the
requirements pertaining to estimation of emission reductions or net
anthropogenic removals as described in the section 7.14 | above and
“Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”.

12.13.2 | The VVB shall determine whether the description of how to undertake the
ex-ante and ex post calculations of baseline, project and leakage GHG
emissions as well as GHG emission reductions to be achieved by each of the
corresponding regular VPAs is in accordance with the applied methodologies,
the applied standardised baselines, the other applied methodological
regulatory documents and, where applicable, the “Standard: Sampling and
surveys for CDM project activities and programmes of activities”.


### 12.14 | Monitoring plan

12.14.1 | The VVB shall determine whether real case VPA-DD complies with the
requirements pertaining to development and description of monitoring plan as
described in the section 7.15 | above and “Programme of Activity
Requirements and Procedures”.

12.14.2 | The VVB shall determine whether the inclusion criteria and description of
how to develop a monitoring plan for its regular VPAs is in accordance with
the applied methodologies.

12.14.3 | The VVB shall state its opinion on the compliance of the description of how
to develop a monitoring plan with the requirements of the applied
methodologies and Coordinating and Managing Entity’s ability to implement
the monitoring plan.

### 12.15 | Eligibility criteria for inclusion of regular VPAs

12.15.1 | The VVB shall determine whether real case VPA-DD defined the eligibility
criteria and required conditions for inclusion of its regular VPAs in the PoA in
accordance to the requirements of “Programme of Activity Requirements and
Procedures”.

12.15.2 | The VVB shall assess how each eligibility criterion, including the conditions
that corresponding regular VPAs meet the requirement in accordance with the
applicable requirements in the “Programme of Activity Requirements and
Procedures", and is verifiable as well as sufficiently objective and
comprehensive to permit the assessment of the inclusion of corresponding
regular VPAs in the PoA.

12.15.3 | The VVB shall assess and state its opinion on approach chosen for site-visits
in view of the inclusion of future regular VPAs in the real case VPA-DD.

### 12.16 | Validation decision and report

```
a. Validation decision
```
12.16.1 | The VVB shall include a statement on the likelihood of the proposed PoA
achieving the anticipated GHG emission reductions or net anthropogenic GHG
removals and SDG impacts stated in the real case VPA(s).

12.16.2 | The VVB shall notify the Coordinating/Managing Entity of the validation
outcome as per para 7.16.2 | above.

12.16.3 | The VVB shall provide its decision including the information described in
para 7.16.2 | above.
**b. Validation report**

12.16.4 | The VVB shall report the results of its assessment in the validation report
including information in the context of proposed PoA and its real case VPA(s)
following requirement described in Section 7.2 b above.


**13| COMPLIANCE CHECK FOR INCLUSION OF REGULAR VPAS**

### 13.1 | General Validation requirements

13.1.1 | The VVB contracted by the Coordinating/Managing Entity to validate a
proposed regular VPA for inclusion in design certified PoA shall be accredited
in the sectoral scope(s) relevant to the VPA.

13.1.2 | The VVB shall apply the objectives, approach and means of validation in
section 6| above mutatis mutandis when validating a proposed regular VPA
for inclusion in the design certified PoA.

13.1.3 | The VVB shall assess whether the proposed regular VPA complies with the
corresponding real case VPA-DD in the latest version of the design certified
POA-DD, including the eligibility criteria for the inclusion of regular VPAs in
the design certified PoA and relevant rules and requirements.

13.1.4 | It is mandatory for the VVB to conduct an on-site inspection at validation for
the proposed regular VPAs unless there is pre-project information that is
relevant to the requirements for inclusion of the regular VPA and may not be
traceable after the inclusion.

### 13.2 | Type and scale

13.2.1 | The VVB shall assess and confirm whether the type and scale of proposed
regular VPA(s) is correctly identified and is in accordance with the inclusion
criteria of corresponding real case VPA.

### 13.3 | Description of the regular VPA

13.3.1 | The VVB shall assess the VPA-DD submitted by the Coordinating and
Managing Entity and shall confirm that the proposed VPA(s) complies with the
requirements described in Section 12.2 | above and in accordance with the
applicable requirements in the “Programme of Activity Requirements and
Procedures".

13.3.2 | The VVB shall assess whether the regular VPAs complies with the applicable
inclusion criteria described in corresponding real case VPA.

### 13.4 | Demonstration of additionality

13.4.1 | The VVB shall assess whether proposed regular VPA(s) complies with the
requirements and modalities for additionality demonstration outlined in the
corresponding real case VPA as per section 12.3 | above.

### 13.5 | Demonstration of prior consideration

13.5.1 | The VVB shall assess the applicability of prior consideration requirement to
proposed regular VPA(s) and determine the validity of evidence presented for
demonstration of prior consideration as per the requirements described in
section **Error! Reference source not found.**

### 13.6 | Start date, duration and crediting period...............................................

13.6.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the Coordinating and Managing Entity
specified the following in accordance with relevant requirements in the
“Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”:


```
a. Start date of the proposed regular VPA(s);
b. Start date of the crediting period of the proposed regular VPA (s);
c. Expected operational lifetime;
d. Type and duration of the crediting period;
```
13.6.2 | The VVB shall assess the above information following the requirements
described in para 7.6.2 | above. The VVB shall also provide its opinion on the
retroactive crediting (if applicable).

13.6.3 | The VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess and state its opinion on the
compliance of start date and crediting period type and duration specified in
the VPA-DD with “Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”.

### 13.7 | Safeguards Assessment

13.7.1 | The VVB shall determine and assess the compliance of proposed regular
VPA(s) with Safeguarding Principles and Requirements in accordance with
modalities in corresponding real case VPA.

### 13.8 | Gender Sensitivity Assessment

13.8.1 | The VVB shall determine and assess the compliance of proposed regular
VPA(s) with the mandatory requirements as outlined in Gender Equality
Requirements & Guidelines in accordance with modalities in corresponding
real case VPA.

### 13.9 | Contributions to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

13.9.1 | The VVB shall determine and assess the compliance of proposed regular
VPA(s) pertaining to SDGs impact assessment in accordance with modalities
in corresponding real case VPA.

### 13.10 | Stakeholder Consultation

13.10.1 | The VVB shall determine and assess the compliance of proposed regular
VPA(s) pertaining to stakeholder consultation requirements in accordance with
modalities in corresponding real case VPA.

### 13.11 | Approval and authorisation

13.11.1 | Refer to section 7.11 | above.

### 13.12 | Application of Baseline and Monitoring Methodology(ies)..........................

```
a. Reference of methodologies
```
13.12.1 | The VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess and state its opinion on the
applicability of the selected methodologies, the selected standardised
baselines and the other applied methodological regulatory documents to the
regular VPA(s) as specified in the corresponding real case VPA.
**b. VPA boundary, sources, and greenhouse gases (GHGs)**

13.12.2 | The VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess and state its opinion on
sources and GHGs included in the regular VPA(s) boundary for the purpose of
calculating project emissions and baseline emissions in accordance with the
modalities in the corresponding real case VPA.


### 13.13 | Baseline Scenario

13.13.1 | The VVB shall assess the baseline scenario established and described for the
proposed regular VPA(s) in accordance with the modalities in the
corresponding real case VPA.

13.13.2 | In the case of the replacement of existing equipment, the VVB shall
determine whether the Coordinating and Managing Entity estimated the point
in time when the existing equipment would be replaced in the absence of the
proposed regular VPAs in accordance with the “Tool to determine the
remaining lifetime of equipment”.

### 13.14 | Estimation of emissions reductions or net anthropogenic removals

13.14.1 | The VVB shall describe the steps taken to assess:

```
a. The equations and parameters applied to calculate GHG emission
reductions or net anthropogenic GHG removals for the regular VPA(s)
in accordance with the modalities in the corresponding real case VPA;
b. The data and parameters fixed ex ante that are used in the equations
to calculate GHG emission reductions or net anthropogenic GHG
removals for the regular VPA(s) in accordance with the modalities in
the corresponding real case VPA;
c. The methodologies and, where applicable, the standardised baselines
and the other methodological regulatory documents have been
applied correctly to calculate baseline, project and leakage GHG
emissions as well as GHG emission reductions or net anthropogenic
GHG removals in accordance with the modalities in the corresponding
real case VPA;
d. The ex-ante estimates of baseline, project and leakage GHG
emissions as well as GHG emission reductions or net anthropogenic
GHG removals, including whether the estimates can be replicated, in
accordance with the modalities in the corresponding real case VPA.
```
### 13.15 | Monitoring Plan

13.15.1 | The VVB shall determine and confirm;

```
a. How the data and parameters to be monitored or estimated on
implementation that are used in the equations to calculate GHG
emission reductions or net anthropogenic GHG removals for the
regular case VPA(s) were assessed in accordance with the modalities
in the corresponding real case VPA
b. How the description of the monitoring plan was assessed in
accordance with the modalities in the corresponding real case VPA.
```
### 13.16 | Eligibility for inclusion

13.16.1 | The VVB shall assess whether the proposed regular VPA(s) complies with the
eligibility criteria for the inclusion of regular VPA(s) defined for the
corresponding real case VPA.


### 13.17 | Validation opinion and report

```
a. Validation opinion
```
13.17.1 | If the VVB determines that the proposed regular VPA(s);

```
a. complies with the corresponding real case VPA-DD in the latest
version of the design certified POA-DD and relevant GS4GG
requirements and procedures, the VVB shall issue a positive
validation opinion and include the regular VPA in the design certified
PoA. or
b. does not comply with the corresponding real case VPA-DD in the
latest version of the design certified POA-DD or relevant GS4GG
requirements and procedures, the VVB shall issue a negative
validation opinion.
b. Validation report
```
13.17.2 | In its validation report for the inclusion of the proposed regular VPA(s) in the
design certified PoA, the VVB shall:
a. Provide all its applied approaches, findings and conclusion on:
i. The completion of the regular VPA-DD, using the valid version
of the applicable form and following instructions therein;
ii. The requirements relevant to the inclusion of the regular VPA in
the corresponding real case VPA;
b. Report on all items listed in Section 13| above.

**14| VALIDATION OF NEW REAL CASE VPA(S)**

14.1.1 | The VVB shall validate the new real case VPA(s) to be added to design
certified PoA applying Design Change Requirements as per section 8| above
and in accordance with the applicable requirements in the “Programme of
Activity Requirements and Procedures".

**15| VALIDATION OF DESIGN CHANGES of POA/VPA**

### 15.1 | Corrections

15.1.1 | The VVB shall determine whether there are any corrections to the information
or parameters fixed at design certification of the PoA or inclusion of a real or
regular VPA as described in the real case VPA-DD or included regular VPA-DD,
and whether the Coordinating and Managing Entity documented them in a
revised POA-DD or VPA-DD.

15.1.2 | If the VVB identifies that there is a correction, the VVB shall determine
whether:
a. The corrected information is an accurate reflection of actual
information; or
b. The corrected parameters are in accordance with the applied
methodologies, the registered monitoring plan, the applied


```
standardised baselines and the other applied methodological
regulatory documents.
```
15.1.3 | The VVB shall state how the corrected information accurately reflects the
actual VPA information and/or how the corrected parameters reflect the
application of the applied methodology(ies), the design certified monitoring
plan and related documents.

### 15.2 | Changes to the start date of the crediting period of VPA

15.2.1 | The VVB shall determine and state its opinion on whether the proposed
change in start date of crediting period complies with the relevant
requirements stated in paragraph 3.1.3 of Design Change Requirements.

15.2.2 | The VVB shall state its opinion on whether the change complies with the
relevant requirements in the “Programme of Activity Requirements and
Procedures".

### 15.3 | Update and/or permanent changes to registered monitoring plan

15.3.1 | The VVB shall determine and state its opinion on whether:

```
a. there are permanent changes to the design certified monitoring plan
and the monitoring permanently deviates from the applied
methodology(ies) (hence requiring revision of the methodology(ies)).
If there are, determine whether the Coordinating and Managing Entity
has described the nature and extent of the non-conforming
monitoring and the proposed alternative monitoring for the VPAs in
the revised VPA-DDs, and the proposed alternative monitoring
complies with the relevant requirements in the “Programme of Activity
Requirements and Procedures".
b. the permanent changes or permanent deviations are in compliance
with the applied methodology(ies) and description on how to develop
a monitoring plan for each of the regular VPA in real case VPA-DD and
do not reduce the level of accuracy of the monitoring compared with
the requirements contained in the design certified monitoring plan;
c. the permanent changes or the permanent deviation of the monitoring
from the applied methodology(ies) are likely to lead to a reduction in
the accuracy of the calculation of emission reductions and SDG
Impacts. If the permanent changes or the permanent deviation will
lead to a reduction in the accuracy of the calculation, the VVB shall
request the CME to apply conservative assumptions or discount
factors to the calculations to the extent required to ensure that
emission reductions will not be over-estimated as a result of the
permanent change or the permanent deviation.
```
15.3.2 | The VVB shall state its opinion on whether the permanent changes or the
permanent deviation comply with the relevant requirements stated in
paragraph 3.1.4 | of Design Change Requirements and “Programme of
Activity Requirements and Procedures".


### 15.4 | Changes to the programme and VPA design

15.4.1 | The VVB shall determine and state its opinion on whether:

```
a. there are proposed or actual changes to the PoA or VPA design of a
design certified project, and, if there are, determine whether the
changes comply with the relevant requirements as described in
Design Change Requirements and “Programme of Activity
Requirements and Procedures";
```
15.4.2 | The VVB shall determine whether the design of certified PoA has been
amended for one of more of the followings
a. To expand the geographic coverage or to include additional host
Parties;
b. To revise the eligibility criteria for the inclusion of regular VPAs;
c. To remove methodologies and/or standardised baselines from the
registered real case VPAs;
d. To change the capacity range specified in the originally design
certified DDs;
e. To add new components or extend/add technologies/measures;
f. To remove a component or technology/measure described in the
design certified DDs;
g. To change the technologies/measures specified in the originally
design certified DD;
h. To make any consequential changes to the application of
methodologies and/or the standardised baselines resulting from the
changes referred to in subparagraphs (a)‒(g) above;
i. To voluntarily update the applied methodologies to be a later valid
version of the same methodologies or change to another methodology
(ies)
15.4.3 | If the design certified PoA has been amended to expand the geographic
coverage or to include additional host Parties, the VVB shall assess and
confirm that:
a. The design certified POA-DD has been revised to reflect the changes;
b. The real case VPA with supporting documents have been submitted
for the new host country in accordance with “Programme of Activity
Requirements and Procedures";

15.4.4 | If the design certified PoA has been amended to remove methodologies
and/or standardised baselines, the VVB shall assess and confirm that:
a. The change only involves the removal and no addition of
methodologies and/or standardised baselines;
b. The removal of the methodologies and/or the standardised baselines
does not affect the physical design of, and the end-use service
provided by, the VPAs that apply the methodologies and the
standardised baselines that remain (i.e., the methodologies and the
standardised baselines that were not removed).


15.4.5 | If the design certified real case VPA has been amended to change the capacity
range specified in the design certified VPA-DD, the VVB shall assess and
confirm that the change does not disqualify the applicability of the applied
methodologies, applied standardised baselines and the other applied
methodological regulatory documents.

15.4.6 | If the design certified real case VPA has been amended to add new
components or extend/add technologies/measures, the VVB shall assess and
confirm that the change introduces complementary technologies/measures
involving mass and/or energy transfer to/from the original
technologies/measures (e.g., addition or change of Type I methodologies in a
design certified VPA-DD primarily applying Type III methodologies).

15.4.7 | If the design certified real case VPA has been amended to remove a
component or technology/measure described in the design certified VPA-DD,
the VVB shall assess and confirm that the removal of the component or
technology/measure does not remove the applicability of the applied
methodologies, the applied standardised baselines and the other applied
methodological regulatory documents;

15.4.8 | If the design certified rea case VPA has been amended to change the
technologies/measures specified in the originally design certified VPA-DD, the
VVB shall assess and confirm that the change only results in the same
technologies/measures as in the registered technologies/measures as per the
definition of “the same technologies” in the “Programme of Activity
Requirements and Procedures”.

15.4.9 | If the design of an included VPA has been changed, the VVB shall assess and
confirm that:
a. If the corresponding real case VPA uses large-scale methodologies,
whether the reason for the increase in the capacity, if applicable, is
not within the control of the Coordinating/Managing Entity. If the
reason is within the control, the revised estimation of emission
reductions due to the change is within the applicable limit allowed in
accordance with the “Programme of Activity Requirements and
Procedures”;
b. If the corresponding real case VPA uses only small-scale
methodologies, whether the resulting increased capacity is within the
threshold for the corresponding small scale project type (i.e., Type I,
II or III);
c. The increase or decrease in the capacity specified in the originally
included regular VPA-DD falls within the capacity range of the
corresponding real case VPA;
d. The new components or extended/added technologies/measures are
covered by the corresponding real case VPA in the design certified
POA-DD and introduce complementary technologies/measures
involving mass and/or energy transfer to/from the
technologies/measures described in the originally included VPA-DD;


```
e. The modified/changed technologies/measures are covered by the
corresponding real case VPA and result in the same
technologies/measures as in the originally included VPA-DD as per the
definition of “the same technologies” in “Programme of Activity
Requirements and Procedures”;
f. The included VPA with the changes is within the scope of the
corresponding real case VPA;
g. The eligibility criteria for these technologies/measures are specified in
the corresponding real case VPA.
```
15.4.10 | When conducting the validations referred to in paragraphs 15.4.5 | - 15.4.9 |
above, in case of actual changes, the VVB shall, by means of an on-site
inspection (where conducted) and a review of the revised POA-DD or VPA-DD
submitted by the Coordinating and Managing Entity that describes the nature
and extent of the actual changes, determine whether this description
accurately reflects the implementation, operation and monitoring of the
modified PoA or VPA.

15.4.11 | When conducting the validations referred to in paragraphs 15.4.5 | - 15.4.9
|above, by means of an on-site inspection or other means of validation carried
out, the VVB shall assess the impacts of the actual changes on the monitoring
plan, the level of accuracy of the monitoring activity, the applied
methodologies, the applied standardised baselines and the other applied
methodological regulatory documents.

15.4.12 | The VVB shall, by means of reviewing the revised POA-DD or VPA-DD
against applicable additionality and other methodological requirements,
determine whether the proposed or actual changes would adversely affect the
conclusions of the validation report on the design certified PoA or the included
VPA with regard to:

```
a. The applicability and application of the applied methodologies, the
applied standardised baselines and the other applied methodological
regulatory documents with which the PoA or VPA has been registered
or included;
b. The compliance of the monitoring plan with the applied
methodologies, the applied standardised baselines and the other
applied methodological regulatory documents;
```
```
c. The level of accuracy and completeness of the monitoring of the PoA
or the VPA;
d. The additionality of the PoA or VPA;
```
```
e. The scale of the VPA;
```
```
f. The eligibility criteria for inclusion of VPAs in the PoA.
g. stakeholder Consultation,
```
```
h. sustainable development impact assessment, including the application
of the GS4GG SDG Impact tool,
```

```
i. safeguarding assessment, and
```
```
j. compliance with applicable legislation/host country regulations
k. gender sensitivity
```
15.4.13 | If the proposed or actual changes affect the additionality of the design
certified PoA or included VPA, the VVB shall confirm whether:
a. If investment analysis was used to demonstrate additionality, the CME
have only modified the key parameters in the original spreadsheet
calculations affected by the proposed or actual changes to the PoA or
VPA;
b. If only barriers were claimed to demonstrate additionality, the VVBs
have demonstrated that the barriers are still valid under the new
circumstances;
c. If the certified project uses an approved positive list or standardised
additionality and the proposed or actual changes affect the
additionality of the project, the project complies with the positive list
of the applied standardised baseline in the design certified POA-DD or
VPA-DD.

15.4.14 | The VVB shall assess and state its opinion on whether:

```
a. the revised POA-DD/VPA-DD complies with all the requirements of the
applied methodologies, and all applicable regulatory documents;
b. if the applied methodology(ies) and/or standardised baselines have
been updated to the latest valid version, or changed to other
methodologies or standardised baselines, the VVB shall confirm that
the revised POA-DD/VPA meets all requirements of the
updated/changed methodologies, including the standards,
methodological tools and guidelines applied in accordance with the
updated/changed methodologies, and/or the updated/changed
standardised baselines.
```
15.4.15 | The VVB shall state its opinion on:

```
a. the description of the proposed or actual changes as compared to the
description in the design certified POA-DD or included VPA-DD;
b. an assessment on when the changes occurred, reasons for these
changes taking place, whether the changes would have been known
prior to the Design Certification of the project, how the changes would
impact on the overall operation/ability of the project to deliver
emission reductions and SDG Impacts as stated in the DDs, and
whether the revised estimation of emission reductions due to the
change takes into account the applicable limits in accordance with
GS4GG requirements and procedures;
c. an assessment regarding whether the changes would adversely affect
the conclusions of the Validation Report of the design certified POA-
DD or included VPA(s)with regard to:
```

```
i. The applicability and application of:
```
1. the applied methodology(ies), the applied standardised
    baselines and the other standard documents with which the
    PoA or VPA has been certified or included;
2. the latest valid version of the applied methodology(ies), the
    applied standardised baselines and/or the other standard
    documents; or
3. other methodology(ies) and/or standardised baselines that
    the certified PoA or VPA has updated/changed to;
ii. The project boundary of VPA(s) and any associated leakages
due to the changes;
iii. The compliance of the monitoring plan with the applied
methodology(ies), the applied standardised baselines and the
other standard documents;
iv. The level of accuracy of the monitoring compared with the
requirements contained in the registered monitoring plan;
v. The additionality of the certified PoA or VPA;
vi. The scale of the certified VPA.
vii. The eligibility criteria for inclusion of VPAs in the PoA.
viii. Stakeholder consultation
ix. Safeguarding assessment
x. Sustainable development impact assessment
xi. Compliance with applicable legislation
xii. Gender sensitivity

15.4.16 | In validating the revised POA-DD or VPA-DD containing the proposed or
actual changes, and in preparing the opinion, the VVB shall include
information on how:
a. the proposed revisions ensure that the level of accuracy and
completeness^30 in the monitoring and verification process is not
reduced as a result of the revision. The VVB shall, using objective
evidence, assess the accuracy and completeness of each proposed
revision to the registered monitoring plan, including the frequency of
measurements, the quality of monitoring equipment (e.g., calibration
requirements, the quality assurance and quality control procedures);
b. the proposed revisions comply with all requirements of:
i. the applied methodology(ies), the applied standardised
baselines and the other standard documents;

(^30) Completeness refers to inclusion of all relevant information for assessment of GHG emissions
reductions and the information supporting the methods applied as required. For example, if the
VVB identifies an on-site generator for emergency use which was not included in the registered
monitoring plan during the verification process, the monitoring of fuel consumption of this
generator should be included in the monitoring plan via this procedure.


```
ii. the updated/changed methodology(ies) including the
standards, methodological tools and guidelines applied in
accordance with the updated/changed methodology(ies),
and/or the updated/changed standardised baselines if updated
to a later valid version or changed to other methodology(ies) or
standardised baselines;
c. the findings of previous verification reports, if any, have been taken
into account
```
15.4.17 | If the proposed changes involve increase in the capacity specified in the
registered PDD, the VVB shall evaluate the impact of the capacity increase on
emission reductions and/or other certified impacts and define the limit up to
which the project may claim emission reductions and/or other certified
impacts in the future, according to the Design Change Requirements.

15.4.18 | In case of LUF projects seeking to include new area of land into the project,
VVB shall assess either before or during the performance certification, based
on a site visit to the new area/s proposed to be included, weather such
area(s) are eligible to be included in the project.

**16| CHANGE of COORDINATING and MANAGING ENTITY**

16.1.1 | If, subsequent to the design certification of the PoA, the
Coordinating/Managing Entity has changed, the VVB undertaking the next
inclusion of a proposed VPA, the VVB that submits the next request for
issuance of GSVERs for the PoA, or the VVB that submits the next post-
registration change request for the PoA, whichever is earlier, shall determine
whether the new Coordinating and Managing Entity:
a. Obtained a new letter from both old and new CME stating the change
and confirming the authorisation of its coordination of the PoA (as
applicable);
b. Provided a confirmation that the PoA will be developed and
implemented with the same framework as described in the design
certified POA-DD;
c. Demonstrated compliance with requirements related to the
operational and management arrangement.

16.1.2 | The VVB shall submit the validation opinion to the Gold Standard secretariat
in accordance with the “Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”.

**17| VERIFICATION OF THE POA AND VPA(S)**

### 17.1 | Objective of verification

17.1.1 | The VVB shall conduct a thorough and independent assessment of the
implemented and monitored PoA and its VPA(s) as per the requirements
described in paragraph 9.1.1 | above and applicable requirements in
“Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures”.


### 17.2 | Verification approach

17.2.1 | The VVB shall review and provide its opinion on the suitability of the following
documentation (and the supporting documents) as part of verification, as
applicable:
a. monitoring reports for all the VPAs for which request of Performance
Certification and/or issuance of GSVERs and SDG impacts is intended
and/or
b. a single monitoring report for VPAs part of the same PoA as long as all
VPA/CPA have the same monitoring period

17.2.2 | The VVB shall conduct a thorough and independent assessment of the
implementation and monitoring of the PoA and VPA(s) against the applicable
regulatory documents.

17.2.3 | The VVB shall, through valid means of verification, evaluate and provide its
opinion on the appropriateness of the sampling approach adopted by the CME.

17.2.4 | In the case of sampling verification, the VVB shall select activities for
verification as per the statistically sound sampling plan defined in the POA-
DD, conduct site visits for all selected activities and deliver a verification
report to Gold Standard.

17.2.5 | The approach chosen for the sampling verification shall be discussed in detail
in the Verification Report. The VVB shall take into account the following
factors, amongst others, while evaluating the implementation of the sampling
approach, provided in the MR:
a. Risks related to the type(s) of project activity
b. Risks related to non-identification of emission and leakage sources
c. Risks related to double counting
d. Uncertainty with respect to the data monitored etc.
e. Different monitoring periods for activities requesting issuance that
may lead to sampling verification not being compatible (any period for
which SDG Impacts are claimed must be covered by verification). For
instance, for a set of activities requesting issuance but having
different monitoring periods, it may not be possible to choose a
sample and all activities may need to be systematically verified.

17.2.6 | Multiple VVBs may be contracted within a same PoA to verify different VPAs.
In case of the choice of a sampling verification, each one of the VVB involved
in the verification shall comply with the sampling approach defined in the
POA-DD.

17.2.7 | Verification of a PoA and its VPAs shall include a site visit by a VVB who
assesses the following against all GS4GG Requirements including applicable
Activity Requirements, Gold Standard Methodology and Product
Requirements:
a. The Monitoring Report (including any updates in Annual Reports)
b. All supporting evidence and documents included by the CME to
demonstrate conformity


17.2.8 | The VVB shall record the result of its assessment in the Verification Report. In
the Verification Report, the VVB shall provide the following:
a. A summary of the verification process, the scope of verification and
its conclusions;
b. A list of each parameter specified by the registered monitoring plan
and a statement on how the values in the monitoring report have
been verified;
c. Findings of the desk review, sampling approach used by the VVB and,
on-site/remote inspection (as applicable). Where the VVB applied a
sampling approach, the VVB shall include a description of how the
sample size was determined and how the field/remote check was
carried out;
d. All its applied approaches, findings and conclusions on the compliance
with applicable GSG44 requirements and procedures (particularly
those prescribed and referenced in this document)
e. An assessment and close-out of any FARs issued to the CME before
verification;
f. A statement on whether any design changes/deviations to the
included VPAs have been positively validated by a VVB and revised
VPA-DD s have been included and/or a statement on whether any
design changes/deviations will be submitted together with the request
for Performance Review/Certification;
g. Details of the verification team, technical experts and internal
technical reviewers involved, together with their roles in the
verification activity and, where conducted, details of who conducted
the on-site/remote inspection;
h. Information on quality control within the team and in the verification
process;
i. A conclusion on the verified amount of emission reductions and SDG
impacts achieved, per VPA, vintage, and with any products claimed;
j. If any cap is established on SDG impacts after a design change,
deviation, grievance, or rule update, whether the claimed SDG
impacts are within the applicable cap.
k. For LUF projects, if there has been any shortfall in the project’s
performance, and if so, whether:
i. the shortfall is due to a reversal event that affects individual
Modelling Units or all modelling units
ii. the Project Developer has adjusted the CO 2 - fixation model
according to the Performance Shortfall Guidelines
iii. there are any PERs issued for which emission reductions have
not been realised for the monitoring period being assessed.


### 17.3 | Means of verification

17.3.1 | Following Standard auditing techniques, the VVB shall assess the information
provided by the CME as per the requirements described in section 9.3 |
above.

17.3.2 | It is mandatory for the VVB to conduct a physical on-site inspection at
verification for the design certified VPA if:
a. It is the first verification for the VVB with regard to this VPA;
b. More than three years have elapsed since the last on-site inspection
conducted for verification for the VPA.
c. For the regular VPAs directly included by the CME following Fast track
inclusion pathway, the VVB shall conduct the site visit within two
years of a VPA’s start date.

17.3.3 | For further information on site visit requirements, refer to section 6.3 b
above.

### 17.4 | Verification of compliance

```
a. General requirements
```
17.4.1 | The VVB shall:

```
a. Identify the included VPAs that it shall consider for verification in
accordance with the methods/procedure to be used and specified in
the design certified POA-DD for verification of the amount of GHG
emission reductions or net anthropogenic GHG removals achieved by
the VPAs.
b. Determine whether the verification covers the regular VPAs that had
been directly included by the Coordinating and Managing Entity in
accordance with the fast track inclusion pathway described in
“Programme of Activity Requirements and Procedures” for which it is
the first verification. If such VPAs exist, the VVB shall assess whether
they comply with the version of the design certified PoA and
corresponding real case VPA applicable when they were included,
including the eligibility criteria for the inclusion of VPAs in the
corresponding real case VPA and the applicable requirements. If the
VVB finds that any of such VPAs do not comply with them, it shall
exclude them from the PoA and shall not include them in the request
for issuance of GSVERs;
c. Take into account the possible existence of included VPAs complying
with different versions of the design certified POA-DD and
corresponding real case VPA^31 and the need to account for this in its
```
(^31) VPAs complying with pre - and post-update of the PoA-DD due to the renewal of the PoA
period or real case VPA are to be separated into separate monitoring reports. On the other
hand, if there is a version change of the PoA-DD due to a post registration change during a
PoA period, VPAs complying with different versions of the PoA-DD, real case VPA-DD may be
included in the same monitoring report.


```
sampling approach to ensure that a statistically sound sample of VPAs
from each version of the PoA and real case VPA are being verified;
d. Systematically verify and certify the correct implementation and
operation of the record-keeping system
```
17.4.2 | The VVB shall include in its verification report and certification report:

```
a. a description of how it applied the methods/procedures for the
purpose of verification specified in the design certified VPA-DD.
b. a description of the on-site/remote inspection(s), where conducted in
accordance with relevant GS4GG requirements, and with the Audit
Techniques Template, if applicable.
```
17.4.3 | If the Coordinating and Managing Entity has prepared a single monitoring
report for a monitoring period, the VVB shall confirm that the monitoring
report contains all monitoring results obtained during the monitoring period
and are in accordance with the “Programme of Activity Requirements and
Procedures”.

17.4.4 | If the Coordinating and Managing Entity has prepared multiple monitoring
reports for separate batches of VPAs corresponding to same real case VPA
included in the design certified PoA, the VVB shall confirm that all the
monitoring reports contain mutually exclusive batches of VPAs, have the same
monitoring period, and collectively contain all monitoring results obtained
during the period, and that each monitoring report contains only monitoring
results of the VPAs that were included or updated^32 in the same PoA period.

17.4.5 | The VVB shall confirm that

```
a. monitoring periods have been consecutive.
b. VPAs have been included in requests for issuance of ERs in a
consecutive manner, that is, when a VPA has been included in a
request for issuance of VERs for a monitoring period, the VVB shall
confirm that a monitoring report for the previous monitoring period
that included the particular VPA has been published.
```
17.4.6 | A request for issuance of GSVERs shall relate to the GSVERs certified.

```
b. Compliance of the monitoring report with the monitoring report form
```
17.4.7 | The VVB shall determine the compliance of the monitoring report following the
requirements described in para 9.4.4 | above.
**c. Compliance of the project implementation with the design certified
DD**

17.4.8 | The VVB shall determine the compliance of the project implementation with
the design certified PoA and real case VPA-DD as per the requirements
described in section 9.4.4 | above.
**d. Compliance of the registered monitoring plan with applied
methodology(ies)**

(^32) Updating of a VPA in this context may occur due to the renewal of the crediting period or a
post registration change to the VPA.


17.4.9 | The VVB shall determine whether the registered monitoring plan is in
accordance with the applied methodology(ies) and related documents and per
the requirements described in section 9.4.4 | above
**e. Compliance of monitoring activities with the registered monitoring
plan**

17.4.10 | The VVB shall determine whether the monitoring of parameters related to
emission reductions and SDG Impacts in the registered PDD has been
implemented in accordance with the registered monitoring plan and
requirements described in section 9.4.4 | above.
**f. Compliance with the calibration frequency requirements for
measuring instruments**

17.4.11 | The VVB shall determine whether the calibration of the measuring
equipment that has an impact on the claimed emission reductions and SDG
Impacts is conducted by the CME at the frequency specified in the applied
methodologies and related documents or the registered monitoring plan and
requirements described in section 9.4.4 | above.
**g. Assessment of data and calculation of emission reductions and SDG
Impacts**

17.4.12 | The VVB shall assess the data and calculations of emission reductions and
SDG Impacts achieved by the design certified VPA and requirements
described in section 9.4.4 | above.

### 17.5 | Quality of evidence

17.5.1 | When verifying the reported emission reductions/removals and SDG Impacts,
the VVB shall confirm the quality of evidence as per the requirements
described in section 9.5 | above.

### 17.6 | Application of materiality

17.6.1 | The concept of materiality and verification approach is applicable to the
verification of all types of design certified PoAs as per the requirements and
procedures described in section 9.6 | above.

17.6.2 | An omission, misstatement, or erroneous reporting of information is material
if it might lead, at an aggregated level, to an overestimation of the total
emission reductions/removals achieved by a design certified PoA equal to or
higher than the thresholds in para 9.6.3 | above. The thresholds shall be read
as for PoA level.

### 17.7 | Verification report

```
a. Verification status
```
17.7.1 | The VVB shall provide an update of the status of its verification activity as
applicable in accordance with the “Programme of Activity requirements and
procedures”.
**b. Verification and certification report**


17.7.2 | The Verification Report shall give an overview of the verification process used
by the VVB in order to arrive at its verification conclusions. All verification
findings shall be identified and justified.

17.7.3 | The VVB shall prepare the verification report as per the requirements
described in section 9.7 | above.

**18| VALIDATION FOR RENEWAL OF PROGRAMME OF ACTIVITIES**

```
PERIOD AND DESIGN CERTIFICATION RENEWAL OF VOLUNTARY
PROJECT ACTIVITIES
```
### 18.1 | Renewal of programme of activities period and real case VPA-DD

18.1.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the Coordinating and Managing Entity has
updated sections of the POA-DD and real case VPA-DD relating to the
eligibility criteria for inclusion of regular VPAs in the PoA, the baseline,
estimated GHG emission reductions or net anthropogenic GHG removals, the
monitoring plan and the PoA period using the valid version of the approved
methodologies and, where applicable, the approved standardised baselines
and the other methodological regulatory documents that are applicable to the
PoA and real case VPA-DD.

18.1.2 | The VVB shall determine whether the Coordinating and Managing Entity, in
accordance with the relevant requirements in the “Programme of Activity
requirements and procedures” requested renewal of the PoA period and real
case VPA crediting period five years after the approval of the revised version
of the methodologies and/or the standardised baselines if the version of the
VPA-DD has been revised because the applied methodologies and/or the
applied standardised baselines have been revised or replaced after having
been placed on hold or withdrawn.

18.1.3 | The VVB shall apply the objectives, approach and means of validation in
section 11|- 12| above mutatis mutandis when validating for renewal of PoA
period.

18.1.4 | The VVB shall determine whether design certification renewal is prepared in
accordance with the relevant requirements in the “Programme of Activity
requirements and procedures” and requirements outlined in section 10| above

### 18.2 | Design certification renewal of regular VPAs

18.2.1 | The VVB shall determine whether the Coordinating/Managing Entity has
updated sections of the regular VPA-DD relating to the demonstration of
eligibility for being included corresponding real case VPA, the baseline,
estimated GHG emission reductions or net anthropogenic GHG removals, the
monitoring plan and the crediting period in accordance with the real case VPA
in the latest version of the VPA-DD.

18.2.2 | If data and parameters used for determining the original baseline, that were
determined ex ante and not monitored during the crediting period, are no
longer valid, the VVB shall confirm that the Coordinating/Managing Entity


```
updated such data and parameters in accordance with applicable
requirements.
```
18.2.3 | The VVB shall determine whether the updated VPA-DD is in compliance with
the latest version of the corresponding design certified VPA-DD.

18.2.4 | The VVB shall apply the general validation requirements in section above
mutatis mutandis when validating for design certification renewal of a regular
VPA.

18.2.5 | The VVB shall assess the information in the updated VPA-DD against the
latest version of the design certified real case VPA-DD, including the eligibility
criteria for inclusion of regular VPAs in the design certified real case VPA-DD,
and documentation requirements.

18.2.6 | The VVB shall prepare a validation report for design certification renewal of an
included VPA using the valid version of the applicable validation report form.

18.2.7 | If the VVB confirms that the updated VPA-DD is in compliance with the latest
version of the registered POA-DD and corresponding real case VPA-DD, it shall
renew the crediting period of the VPA in accordance with the “Programme of
Activity requirements and procedures”.

#### ---------

## DOCUMENT HISTORY

```
Version Date Description
```
#### 2.0 12/11/2024

```
― Procedural Updates for Managing Certification
Requests Under the New Assurance Approach
― Editorial changes
1.0 06/03/2023 ― Initial adoption
```

