##### CORE DOCUMENT

# REQUIREMENTS FOR SELECTION OF

# MONITORING INDICATORS IN THE SDG

# IMPACT TOOL

#### PUBLICATION DATE 18. 10. 2025

#### VERSION 1. 0

#### RELATED DOCUMENTS

- Digital SDG Impact Tool Manuals – Gold Standard for the Global Goals
- SDG Impact Tool Manual – Gold Standard for the Global Goals
- Principles & Requirements – Gold Standard for the Global Goals

#### CONTACT DETAILS

The Gold Standard Foundation
International Environment House 2
Chemin de Balexert 7- 9
1219 Châtelaine Geneva, Switzerland
Tel +41 22 788 70 80
Email help@goldstandard.org

## SUMMARY

GS4GG requires all projects to demonstrate their contribution to the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) using the SDG Impact Tool. The SDG Impact Tool
provides a pre-defined matrix of monitoring indicators aligned with the technologies
being implemented.
This document establishes the requirements for project developers and
Coordinating/Managing Entities (CMEs) in selecting appropriate monitoring indicators
in the SDG Impact Tool that are directly relevant to the project context, ensuring
accuracy, consistency, and credibility in impact assessment and reporting. These
requirements shall be taken into consideration by the project developers and CMEs
before the tool is submitted to VVB or Gold standard for review. Project Developers
and/or CMEs shall refer to the SDG Impact Tool manuals to familiarise themselves


**TOOL**

with the tool’s features and functionalities, thereby enabling them to submit requests
efficiently:

1. Digital SDG Impact Tool Manuals – Gold Standard for the Global Goals
2. SDG Impact Tool Manual – Gold Standard for the Global Goals (MS Excel version)

### TABLE OF CONTENTS

#### 1| SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY __________________________________________________ 3

#### 2| ENTRY INTO FORCE ________________________________________________________ 3

3| GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ___________________________________________________ 3

4| REQUIREMENTS FOR SELECTION OF MONITORING INDICATORS ____________________ 3

5| PROPOSING NEW INDICATORS OR MODIFICATIONS TO EXISTING INDICATORS ________ 4

6| POST-DESIGN CERTIFICATION CHANGES _______________________________________ 5

7| DOCUMENT HISTORY ______________________________________________________ 5


**TOOL**

## 1| SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY

1.1.1 | These requirements apply to all GS4GG projects irrespective of project scale,
technology type, or any other project-specific characteristics.
1.1.2 | These requirements define the minimum requirements for selecting monitoring
indicators that are directly and materially linked to the project’s core activities,
outputs, and outcomes.
1.1.3 | The term “project” refers to standalone project activity, Programme of Activities
(PoA) or included VPAs, unless stated otherwise.

## 2| ENTRY INTO FORCE

2.1.1 | The requirements become applicable on their release date.

## 3| GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

3.1.1 | As per the Principles & Requirements, each GS4GG project shall demonstrate
their contribution to a minimum of 3 SDGs which shall mandatorily include SDG
13 – “Climate Action”.
3.1.2 | Project developers shall select monitoring indicators exclusively from those
provided within the SDG Impact Tool. The tool’s content, including the list of
indicators, shall not be modified or supplemented with additional indicators.
3.1.3 | Project developers may propose for inclusion of additional custom indicator(s)
or modification of existing indicators by submitting a proposal to the secretariat.
The project developer shall fill the Template – Proposal for Monitoring
Indicator(s) for inclusion in the SDG Impact Tool and submit it to the secretariat
at help@goldstandard.org. Such indicators shall be subject to review and
approval by the Secretariat before inclusion in the SDG Impact Tool.
3.1.4 | All selected SDG indicators must be directly and materially linked to the project
including its core activities, outputs, and outcomes.
3.1.5 | Each selected indicator must be supported by a clear, evidence-based causal
pathway that demonstrates the link between project and the expected SDG
outcome.

## 4| REQUIREMENTS FOR SELECTION OF

## MONITORING INDICATORS

**4.1 | Principles for Indicator Selection**

4.1.1 | Materiality: Indicators must be directly and materially linked to the project’s
core activities, outputs, and intended outcomes.
4.1.2 | Relevance: Chosen indicators must reflect the project’s primary contribution to
the SDGs, not peripheral or incidental impacts.
4.1.3 | Clarity: Indicators must be clearly defined, with unambiguous measurement
units and methodologies.


**TOOL**

4.1.4 | Comparability: Where possible, indicators should align with internationally
recognised SDG metrics to allow benchmarking across projects.
4.1.5 | Feasibility: Indicators must be practical to monitor with available resources,
data, and capacity.

**4.2 | Selection of monitoring indicators**

4.2.1 | Project Developers must only use the monitoring indicators available in the SDG
Impact Tool, which are pre-mapped to the selected technology. Manual entry
or override of these indicators is strictly prohibited.
4.2.2 | The project developers shall demonstrate that the monitoring indicators chosen
from the list of available monitoring indicators in the SDG impact tool are a
direct impact of their project technological intervention and not secondary or
tertiary impact.
4.2.3 | The tool will show many monitoring indicators for the chosen technology.
However, the project developer shall only choose the indicators which are
relevant and have direct, material impact.
4.2.4 | Each monitoring indicator included in the monitoring plan shall be mutually
exclusive and shall not result in double counting of impacts.
4.2.5 | The monitoring indicators selected shall be traceable, transparent, and
verifiable.
4.2.6 | The selected indicators shall be assessed by the VVB during validation and
design certification renewal for relevance, traceability, and alignment of the
causal pathway.
4.2.7 | If the verifying VVB or GS reviewer during performance review identifies an
erroneous SDG impact monitoring indicator selection, they shall request a
design change.

## 5| PROPOSING NEW INDICATORS OR

## MODIFICATIONS TO EXISTING INDICATORS

**5.1 | Considerations for new indicators or modifications to existing indicators
proposed for inclusion in the tool**

5.1.1 | The proposed indicator must capture impacts that are material and significant,
not marginal or incidental.
5.1.2 | Indicators shall address gaps where existing SDG Impact Tool indicators do not
adequately reflect the project’s contribution.
5.1.3 | Each proposed indicator must be mapped to a specific SDG target and/or UN-
defined indicator.
5.1.4 | The indicator must be clearly defined, with a precise description of what is being
measured and must specify the unit.
5.1.5 | Proposal to include a new indicator must include a transparent methodology for
data collection and calculation. Indicators must be measurable with reasonable
effort using available tools, resources, and capacity.
5.1.6 | Where possible, indicators should allow for disaggregation (e.g., by gender,
age, geography, income group).


**TOOL**

## 6| POST-DESIGN CERTIFICATION CHANGES

6.1.1 | Should the project developer/CME wish to make amendments to the selected
monitoring indicators or add other indicators to the monitoring plan, the steps
in Design Change Request Requirements and Procedures shall be followed.

## 7| DOCUMENT HISTORY

##### VERSION DATE DESCRIPTION

```
1.0 18. 10 .2025 Initial adoption
```

